Table of Contents


Title Page

Front Matter

Book Info

Dedication

Preface

Acknowledgements

Introduction

Part I

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Part II

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Part III

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Part IV

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Part V

Chapter 18

Images

Back Matter

Books by Rickover

Source Materials

References List





THE NEVER-ENDING CHALLENGE OF ENGINEERING

Admiral H. G. Rickover in His Own Words





Compiled by Paul E. Cantonwine La Grange Park, Illinois USA





Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Rickover, Hyman George.

[Works. Selections. 2013] The never-ending challenge of engineering : Admiral H.G. Rickover in his own words / compiled by Paul E. Cantonwine.

pages cm Includes bibliographical references and index.





ISBN 978-0-89448-579-4 (ebook) 1. Engineering. 2. Leadership. 3. Military engineering--United States. 4.

Nuclear engineering--United States. 5. United States. Navy--Research-History--20th century. 6. Rickover, Hyman George. I.

Cantonwine, Paul E. II. Title.

TA155.R53 2013 620.0092--dc23

2013035089

ISBN: 978-0-89448-579-4 Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 2013035089 ANS Order Number: 690090 © 2013 American Nuclear Society 555 North Kensington Avenue La Grange Park, Illinois 60526 USA All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without the written permission of the publisher.





For My Parents

and

In Memory of Theodore Rockwell





PREFACE





This book is a practical and philosophical look at the principles used by engineers from the perspective of one of America’s greatest engineers, Admiral Hyman George Rickover. Admiral Rickover is an icon in the history of nuclear power, and the list of his accomplishments is long. From the USS Nautilus and its land-based prototype (the first nuclear-powered submarine and large-scale application of nuclear power), to the USS Seawolf (the first submarine powered by a liquid metal, sodium-cooled reactor), to the Shippingport Atomic Power Station in western Pennsylvania (the first fully commercial demonstration of nuclear power), to the light water breeder reactor (the first demonstration of nuclear fuel breeding in a light water reactor), Rickover built the foundation for a safe nuclear power industry and, thus, deserves to be called the “Father of Nuclear Power.” Admiral Rickover understood well the history of technology and one of his greatest contributions was to develop nuclear power technology to meet much higher safety and quality standards than past technological developments. Still today, no radiological deaths have been caused by nuclear power technology in Rickover’s nuclear Navy or within the U.S.

commercial nuclear industry (including Three Mile Island and Fukushima, which used U.S. reactor technology) and only three such deaths at an experimental reactor designed for the Army.[1] This record of safety is unique in the history of power technology, and thus the thoughts of the man most responsible for how nuclear power technology was developed in the United States should be of interest to everyone working in a technical field— especially ones where customer/public safety and quality are paramount.

I was introduced to Admiral Rickover in 1999 (13 years after his death) when I joined the Bettis Atomic Power Laboratory to work in the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program (NNPP), which he had started in 1948 and led until 1982. I had just finished my Ph.D. in materials science and engineering at the University of Virginia. Academically, I was well prepared to contribute.

However, I learned very early on that although I was knowledgeable about my field, I had much to learn about applying it within an organization that had to make real engineering decisions. In retrospect, I might describe the feelings I had transitioning from a researcher in the academic world to an engineer in the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program as a culture shock.

Implicitly we understand that an organization’s culture is defined by its leader. That is, an important part of leadership is shaping culture. And the culture of the NNPP was, and I am sure still is, largely shaped by its first leader, Admiral H. G. Rickover. When Rickover was still leading the program, he was often approached by others to describe how he managed such a successful program. Usually he felt others were looking for a recipe for success, a sort of leadership-by-numbers approach. He invariably disappointed them when he said that he had no recipe to give them. Instead, when he talked about the success of his program he talked about cultural factors, such as personal responsibility, valuing education and training, fostering a questioning attitude, facing the facts, driving quality, and designing with conservatism for safety. In the NNPP, every new engineer is indoctrinated with a concern for the safety of the sailors who eat, sleep, and work in close quarters with a nuclear reactor. Rickover would often make this point when discussing conservatism by asking those involved in the technical discussion, “What would you do if your son was a sailor on this ship?” When I left the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program in 2006 for a commercial nuclear fuel vendor, I had a very different experience compared to my first transition. Instead of culture shock, I immediately felt at home. I now attribute this experience to Admiral Rickover’s influence on the culture in the commercial nuclear industry. In my organization, our leaders shape our culture by continually reinforcing that Integrity, Safety, and Quality must always come before Output (ISQO). We refer to it as an ISQO culture. For the industry, the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission also reinforce these cultural values in their policy statements on safety culture—where most of the safety-culture traits are right out of Rickover’s engineering philosophy.

The idea of compiling Rickover’s writings into a book came to me during a lunch meeting with Ted Rockwell, author of The Rickover Effect, who worked intimately with Admiral Rickover during the first 15 years of the Naval Reactors program (1949–1964). I had recently read a number of Rickover’s books and many of his speeches, and I found in Rickover’s writings an intellectual engineer who had no fear about speaking his mind on any topic—especially when he felt it needed a bit of criticism. Besides engineering and technology, he wrote and spoke about education, democracy, government and history, business, law, and the Navy. The American education establishment was the target of most of Rickover’s criticism; improving education was the topic of three of his books and countless speeches. But as an engineer in the nuclear power industry, I was mostly taken by his writings on engineering and technology. In some cases this was also criticism, as in his 1962 speech to the National Metals Congress, which inspired the title for this book (see Chapter 7), or his 1974 speech on engineering in the Navy (see Chapter 9). But in most cases, I would characterize the purpose of his writings on engineering as a desire to pass on advice. He gave advice to young people entering a technology field, to practicing engineers, to leaders responsible for managing technology, and to nontechnical people on how the country should best develop technology that affects the public.

The chapters of this book were written by Admiral Rickover largely as speeches that he gave over a 30-year period from 1953 to 1982. Although his thoughts are as much as 60 years old, they are still relevant today (though, hopefully, his use of “man” in the universal will not be distracting to female readers). The book is divided into five different parts, with each part addressing various never-ending challenges of engineering. The challenge of continually developing the mind is addressed in Becoming an Innovator, and examples of how this might be done are provided in the biographical sketches of Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Edison, and George Washington Carver in Three American Innovators. In Engineering in Practice, Rickover considers the never-ending challenge of creating an organizational culture where engineers can work as professionals, where they are technically competent and held responsible for their work, where they can demand highquality standards, and where they face facts and design with conservatism.

In Technology’s Impact on Society, Rickover considers how technology has affected our lives and environment, and the roles engineers and the electorate play to ensure that the rewards outweigh the risks. Part V, Epilogue, provides Rickover’s “Thoughts on Man’s Purpose in Life.” One formatting note: To clearly distinguish between Admiral Rickover’s writing and mine in the chapters that follow, his writing is shown in Garamond, whereas mine is shown in Universe in a shaded box.

The process of reading, copying, and organizing what I thought were Admiral Rickover’s best writings on engineering and technology into a book has been, for me, a tremendous learning experience, and it is my hope that reading the book will be a learning experience for you too.

Rickover will challenge you to lift yourself up intellectually to become the best engineer and leader you can be. His thought was very human-centric as opposed to organization-centric or process-centric. He recognized that only through people will work get done and that the purpose of work should be the benefit of all. I hope you will enjoy reading the book as much as I enjoyed compiling it.





Paul E. Cantonwine

July 2013





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS





First and foremost, this book would not have been possible without the encouragement and guidance of Ted Rockwell, who sadly passed away in March 2013. Ted challenged me to make this book happen, provided guidance as it took shape, and was instrumental in approaching Eleonore Rickover about republishing Admiral Rickover’s copyrighted material. I consider it an honor to have worked with him and will always be indebted.

I, of course, would like to thank Eleonore Rickover for providing permission to republish her husband’s works and ASM International for providing permission to republish Admiral Rickover’s article “The NeverEnding Challenge,” which inspired the title of the book.

I would also like to acknowledge the library associates at the New Hanover County Library, who were able to deliver to me nearly any book I desired through the interlibrary loan system. It was through an interlibrary loan that I found Congress’ anthology of Admiral Rickover’s speeches—a gold mine of source material for me. In addition, I want to acknowledge Lt.

Callie D. Ferrari, APR of the Naval Office of Information East, and Lisa Crunk of the Naval History and Heritage Command for their help in obtaining permissions and finding photos from the Navy for the book.

As with any book there are many people in the publishing process to thank. Many thanks to Eric Loewen for being my sponsor at ANS; James Groves, Henry Petroski, Marty Schleehauf, and Larry Foulke for their reviews of all or parts of the book; Lorretta Palagi for her great editorial work; and, finally, Rick Michal for leading me through the publishing maze.

On a personal note, I would like to thank my children, John Paul and Susie, for their support of my “book hobby.” I hope someday you will enjoy reading this book. And finally, to Sheila, my wife: a simply thank you doesn’t seem to quite cover my feelings. You are the foundation of a wonderful family life that fills my day with joy. Your support maintained me during those many early morning hours compiling and writing. Thank you!





INTRODUCTION





Admiral Rickover—Innovative Engineer The story of Admiral H. G. Rickover is a thoroughly American one. The son of an immigrant tailor, Rickover rose from the poor working class West Side of Chicago to become the “Father of Nuclear Power” in the United States and one of America’s greatest engineers. He was a man of innovation who, in the five years between 1948 and 1953, literally forged the power of the atom into a nuclear-powered “steam engine” within the confines of a submarine hull—eventually leading to the 1954 launching of the USS Nautilus, the first nuclear-powered submarine, and the 1957 start-up of the Shippingport Atomic Power Station, the first full-scale nuclear plant designed solely for commercial purposes. Although the idea to make useful power from the atom was not Rickover’s, he made the idea a reality like no other.

Hyman George Rickover was born in Poland to Rachel and Abraham Rickover in 1900. In 1906 he, his mother, and his older sister Fannie came to America through Ellis Island to join their father in New York. This reunion ended a ten-year ordeal caused by the anti-Semitism the family experienced in Russian Poland. After struggling in New York for five years, his father settled the family in Lawndale, Illinois, on the west side of Chicago.

Lawndale was poor but respectable. The Rickovers, who were now a family of five (Rickover’s sister Augusta was born soon after the family’s reunion), lived in a small apartment consisting of three rooms—one of which they rented out.[1] Like most Americans of that time, Rickover began working at an early age because the family needed his earnings. Hyman got his first job when he was nine holding a kerosene lamp for a neighbor who worked forming metal decorations in a basement. This was the start of a lifetime of work—a capacity for which he was renowned. When he finished grammar school at fourteen, Rickover was expected to start working full time like his older sister Fannie who was working as a stenographer.[2] So at fourteen years old, Rickover started working as a Western Union messenger boy, but his desire to continue his education was so strong that he coordinated his school and work schedules so that he could attend John Marshall High School during the day and then work the 3 to 11 p.m. shift at the Western Union office. At John Marshall, Rickover took what would now be called a college preparatory course of study. He particularly excelled in history and English, and the love of these two subjects would sustain his voracious reading for the rest of his life.[3] After graduation Rickover wanted more formal education but he had few, if any, prospects. His life was to turn on a single event. Through the political connections of a relative renting a room from his family, he received a nomination to the Naval Academy from their local congressman, Adolph J.

Sabath. He later recounted this as one of the most joyous moments in his life. In the young Rickover’s mind, the Naval Academy would have offered a future of, until then, unimaginable opportunity.[4] As a member of the Class of 1922 at the Naval Academy, Rickover made the best of his opportunity. He survived the hazing that was typical of the plebe year but would never be a popular cadet. For one, he was Jewish at a time when anti-Semitism was still rampant. He also found his educational foundation lacking (probably from working full time while at John Marshall). He thus had to spend all his free time studying. At night he was even known to rig up a space in the shower to study while his roommates slept. Studying in free time was a habit he would keep his entire life— eventually making him a true intellectual engineer. His class standing after his first year was 357 out of 820; by graduation he had improved to 107 out of 540. Although his standing was respectable, it provided no indication that he would be responsible for one of the greatest innovations in the history of naval technology.[5] In later years he would be critical of the education he received at the Naval Academy because of its then focus on the memorization of facts rather than the teaching of principles. Education and training would become for him a lifework, not only for himself but for the Naval Reactors program he created and for the nation as a whole. Many who now work in the nuclear industry are graduates of his nuclear power school, which still trains the officers and enlisted who run the nuclear propulsion plants for the Navy. In addition, three of the five books he wrote were on improving the American education system: Education and Freedom; Swiss Schools and Ours: Why Theirs Are Better; and American Education, a National Failure: The Problem

of Our Schools and What We Can Learn from England. As the blunt titles imply, his thought wasn’t well received by the education establishment, which he fondly referred to as “educationists”—a none too subtle linkage to other unflattering “ists” like communists, fascists, and socialists.[6] Rickover’s naval career before World War II was undistinguished compared to what was normally considered a distinguishing career: becoming a line officer commanding a ship. It is not that Rickover didn’t excel or lead, but his demeanor and tactics didn’t seem to fit the typical mold of a ship commander. In some sense, Rickover was a fish out of water in the Navy; he bristled in a bureaucratic organization that operated with formality, protocol, etiquette, and tradition. But like any career that blossoms late, these pre–World War II years provided the foundation for his later success.

As an engineering officer aboard a destroyer, two submarines, and two battleships, Rickover was responsible for how these ships operated. He learned early on that to operate ships well he had to understand the details of how they worked, which sometimes meant crawling around the insides.

His shore duty as an equipment inspector provided him with knowledge of how equipment was designed by industry and procured by the Navy. His work at the Cavite Navy Yard in the Philippines provided experience with maintenance and repairs. And his master’s in electrical engineering from Columbia University provided him with an excellent basis in the principles of engineering. Ultimately, this knowledge of naval engineering became the source of his innovations during and after World War II.[7] One incident from this period that Rickover never forgot occurred during

his first assignment as an engineering officer aboard the destroyer La Vallette. The ship was scheduled to leave port one day when his men reported a crack in a condenser tube. After reporting the need to delay the scheduled departure, considered a black mark for the ship, he remembered that most of his men had returned from shore drunk the night before.

Suspicious, he went to inspect the crack himself, and found it was only a dark pencil mark. The lesson was that personal oversight inspection was needed to ensure quality. It was a lesson he learned well—eventually becoming a Rickover hallmark.[8] When World War II started, Rickover was stationed in Washington, D.C., as the head of the Electrical Section of the Bureau of Ships, which was responsible for building and maintaining the Navy fleet. This was no small task given the frenetic pace of shipbuilding prior to and during the war. The overwhelming nature of the work meant that some sections at the bureau concentrated on contract administration and budgeting just to ensure the yards had the required equipment, leaving the technical details to the equipment manufacturers. That is, the Navy defined the requirements of the equipment, but the manufacturer defined the specifications of how to meet those requirements. Rickover, however, saw the process differently. In his mind, the Navy, as the customer, had all rights and responsibilities to set the specifications of the equipment and then demand the manufacturer meet those specifications. Rickover’s approach required his group to be highly technical and capable of going “toe to toe” with the manufacturers in disputes regarding equipment performance. It was an approach that proved successful in the Electrical Section, and one he continued when he became head of the Naval Reactors group.[9]

One area where the Electrical Section was innovative under Rickover was in the development of shock-resistant electrical equipment. Rickover had seen all too well how supposedly shock-resistant equipment performed in battle by examining ship damage in both the U.S. and British fleets. His sense of responsibility for the performance of electrical equipment led to his establishing shock test programs—independent of the equipment manufacturers—to test their equipment and then modify the specifications to improve performance. Shock-resistant generators, motors, controllers, circuit breakers, voltage regulators, and switchboards were all developed under Rickover’s leadership. He was also famous for performing his own shock test when manufacturers brought in their “shock-resistant” equipment. He called it the “radiator test” because it consisted of him throwing the equipment against the radiator to see if it would survive.[10]

As World War II was nearing the end, Rickover requested and was granted duty in harm’s way. He was given command of a Naval Repair Base on Okinawa about a week before U.S. troops landed there on April 1, 1945.

Okinawa was important because it was only 330 miles from mainland Japan and would be the most forward base for the final invasion of the war.

Rickover arrived in Okinawa in late April and immediately began to build a repair base from scratch. When the fighting at Okinawa finally ended in June 1945, more than 12,000 U.S. troops had been killed and over 35,000 wounded. The U.S. military had killed over 100,000 Japanese troops, capturing less than 10,000. Civilian loss of life was estimated to be as high as 140,000.[11] The ferocity of the fighting represented by these sterile statistics foreshadowed the suffering an invasion of mainland Japan would cause— making the decision to drop atomic bombs inevitable. On August 6, 1945, the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima. Three days later, the second was dropped on Nagasaki. The invasion of Japan was avoided by the arrival of the atomic age. The naval repair shop on Okinawa had become unnecessary in an instant. Rickover’s hard work of the previous four months had thankfully been for naught. But within nine months, Rickover would embark on an engineering adventure to transform the awesome destructive power of the atom into safe and useful nuclear energy. It was an adventure for which he was well prepared.

In July 1946, when Rickover arrived at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, to start a yearlong course in nuclear science and technology, the field was in its infancy. The Navy’s interest in atomic energy had dated back to the discovery of fission in 1939, but it had been largely kept out of the Army’s secret Manhattan Project. Rickover was one of a select group of outsiders invited to learn about the new field. The objective of Rickover and the four young Navy officers he led was to evaluate the potential use of atomic power to propel a ship.[12] Relatively early on, Rickover came to the conclusion that nuclearpowered propulsion was possible, but required an engineering approach rather than the scientific approach he observed at Oak Ridge. If real nuclear power was going to happen in the near term, it was going to need an engineer to lead it, and Rickover was just the man. Using good basic engineering tactics, Rickover divided and conquered the new technology by giving each member of his team assignments to learn specific aspects of the new technology. He then had them summarize their new knowledge in written reports, which could be used by the group to more quickly learn what the others had spent weeks or months doing.[13] Writing for Rickover was an important engineering tool. He once put it this way: “Important issues should be presented in writing. Nothing so sharpens the thought process as writing down one’s arguments. Weaknesses overlooked in oral discussion become painfully obvious on the written page.”[14]

Eventually these summary reports grew into the Naval Reactor Handbooks. Published between 1950 and 1962, the handbooks documented many of the innovations of Rickover’s Naval Reactors program and included information engineers would need for fuels, absorbers, structural reactor materials, shielding, core design, and plant construction to develop safe and useful nuclear energy for commercial applications. Not surprisingly, a number these handbooks are still used today.

After Rickover’s year at Oak Ridge, the adventure continued in Washington from a woman’s restroom that had been renovated into an office—an indication of his standing in the Navy. In addition, the Navy dispersed his team, which meant the technical part of the adventure had to slow down until he could get the bureaucratic standing he needed. To accomplish his goal of a nuclear-powered submarine, Rickover had to first get a program recognized and funded, be assigned head of that program, get the submarine on the Navy’s construction program, and finally have Congress approve construction. All this he did by the summer of 1950.

Obviously Rickover had help on this front. Many people recognized the value of a nuclear-powered submarine and especially how it would counteract the growing Soviet menace. But most people thought nuclear propulsion was decades away if it would happen at all. Somehow Rickover overcame the skepticism, and in 1955 when the USS Nautilus was commissioned into active service, Rickover had delivered as promised. Delivering as promised enhanced Rickover’s credibility in Congress and their resulting trust in him was to become a great source of power that others in the Navy and Department of Defense would come to envy and sometimes hate.[15] Congress also appreciated Rickover’s stewardship of the American people’s money. His protectiveness of the funds given to him was apparent from his sparse office accommodations to his strict demands of his vendors.

To say Rickover was a demanding customer is an understatement. The quality requirements of nuclear-grade components and construction were more stringent than typical for American industry at that time because Rickover understood the direct correlation between quality and safety of the sailors and the public. However, his demand on vendors was quite simple and straightforward—deliver as promised. When a company signed a contract with Rickover and agreed to the product specifications and a delivery date, he expected of them only what he expected of himself.[16] When Rickover became head of the Naval Reactors group in the summer of 1948, he turned in earnest to the technical challenges, which were many. But his first act was a personnel decision, not a technical one— he reassembled his Navy Group from Oak Ridge. The importance that Rickover put on hiring and training is legendary. He felt so strongly about it that he interviewed every potential officer before they were accepted to his nuclear training program.[17] By the end of his career he had interviewed well over 10,000 Navy officers, countless enlisted, and many civilians. Those who made it were thoroughly trained at one of his nuclear power schools.

Rickover once put his thoughts on hiring and training people this way: “I well knew that selection and training of personnel is the most important function of an administrator, [and] I devoted considerable time to this problem. If one chooses the right people, there is little else to do. To put it another way: Everything in the world must be done through and by people.”[18] Rickover had an enticing goal for these young Navy officers—to operate a nuclear power plant—and for the civilian engineers and scientists—to build one. If he hired you, you knew you were going to accomplish something important.

What more could a person ask for?

With the technical team now assembled, the technical work began in earnest. The transformation of a diesel/battery-powered submarine into a nuclear-powered one required not only the development of a reactor plant but also the use of steam turbine propulsion—long a standard system in surface ships but never within the confines of a submarine. The use of steam turbine propulsion with an electric motor backup connected to a steam-driven electric generator provided an important early design constraint for the reactor plant: The reactor plant had to generate hightemperature, high-pressure steam.[19]

The nuclear reactor generates heat that is transferred to the reactor coolant and then flows through the primary side to a heat exchanger (called a steam generator). At the heat exchanger, the heat is transferred to steam on the secondary side, which is then sent to the propulsion system. Rickover developed both the pressurized water reactor (PWR) used in the USS Nautilus and the sodium-cooled reactor used in the USS Seawolf. Essentially, Rickover was able to bet on both horses in a two-horse race—a race eventually won by the PWR.[20]

The primary/secondary concept also allowed Rickover to theoretically focus most of the technology development on the primary side and rely on available technology for the secondary side. Given the many years of experience that American industry had generating and using steam, it seemed reasonable to expect fewer problems on the secondary side. The reality was much different, and Rickover found that his program had to spend much of its time evaluating the quality of components delivered for the secondary side, eventually setting up an entire organization responsible for procuring and ensuring the quality of these components.[21]

Rickover insisted on high standards of quality by inspecting and testing components to ensure they met specifications, by auditing manufacturers, and, in some cases (like at the shipyards and at Shippingport), by having a resident inspector overseeing the work as it was being done. Rickover was preaching quality thirty years before the quality invasion from Japan in the 1980s, and his standards for quality for the nuclear industry would eventually be codified in 10CFR50 Appendix B, which outlines quality control requirements for the commercial nuclear industry. In addition, since the post-TMI upgrades, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has used Rickover’s resident inspector technique at each nuclear power plant.

On the primary side, the technological innovations centered on the fuel elements, the control rods, and radiation safety. In the area of radiation safety, the required engineering approaches to shielding and radiation protection were limited in 1948. But this wasn’t a roadblock for Rickover. He just had the necessary engineering approaches developed, eventually being published in the Reactor Shielding Design Manual (1956).[22] To develop fuel elements and control rods, the first requirement was to ensure that the materials used could withstand the reactor environment, which was high-temperature, high-pressure water in the PWR within a cloud of high-energy neutrons, which maintained the fission process that generated heat. The high-temperature water environment required corrosion resistance, whereas the bombardment of neutrons required dimensional stability over a time when every atom would be knocked out of its lattice site by a neutron more than once. To say the least, the environment within a nuclear reactor is demanding on material performance and would require a bold innovation—the use of zirconium as the main structural material within the neutron cloud.

The choice of zirconium eventually led to development of a uranium alloy fuel element clad with zirconium. Rickover first used this innovation in the USS Nautilus and then in Shippingport where uranium oxide fuel pellets were clad in zirconium alloy tubes. The zirconium/uranium oxide fuel rod became the standard fuel element used today in the commercial nuclear industry. To use zirconium, however, Rickover would have to solve a significant sourcing problem. In 1947, the total production of zirconium in the United States was about 100 pounds of impure material, but by 1951 Rickover would need over 30,000 pounds[23] of the highest quality zirconium merely to build the prototype for the USS Nautilus. To accomplish this goal, Rickover drove the development of the zirconium industry in a matter of a few years.

Once the USS Nautilus was launched, Rickover’s influence in the Navy and in the country reached levels he never could have imagined in the mud-filled fields of Okinawa in 1945. Rickover’s nuclear-powered submarines were to become an important counterbalance to the rising Soviet threat, especially after Sputnik created the need for a fleet of submarines that could launch nuclear ballistic missiles. By 1965, fifty-two nuclear-powered submarines and three nuclear-powered surface ships had been commissioned.[24] On December 18, 1957, his Shippingport Atomic Power Station, the first nuclear power plant designed solely to provide commercial electricity, began full-power operation. The scrappy admiral had even graced the cover of Time magazine on January 11, 1954. Although Rickover was influential, his tenure as the head of the Naval Reactors program was never easy. In 1953, Congress had to intervene in the promotion of Rickover to avoid a forced retirement and Rickover would continually have to fight efforts to remove him.[25] Many in the Navy and the Department of Defense didn’t appreciate his bull-in-a-china-shop style and saw his power with Congress as a threat.

In the end Rickover would survive as head of the Naval Reactors program until 1982, when at age eighty-two he was finally forced to retire after over sixty years of service to the United States. He died four years later. He rightly earned the honor of being called the “Father of Nuclear Power” because his influence was felt throughout the industrial world. This title does not diminish the great effort of many thousands of people who made nuclear-powered propulsion (and nuclear power in general) possible, but instead reflects the realization that nuclear power would not be the same without Rickover. His engineering brilliance was to always consider performance of a component in the context of sailor and public safety, ease of operations and maintenance, manufacturing, sourcing, and quality. His insistence on excellence created a culture that practiced what he called “the discipline of technology.”[26] Rickover’s discipline of technology was just the approach nuclear power needed to develop the necessary innovations that made it a safe reality. His is the legacy of an innovative engineer.





PART I: BECOMING AN INNOVATOR





Admiral Rickover had a passion for education—the foundation for innovation. His thoughts on education were born out of his own experiences—first in his own education and then as a leader of men who had to be trained to operate and build ships and, of course, develop nuclear power for ship propulsion. His work educating his organization led him to recognize the weaknesses in the American education system, and three of his five books were criticisms on education. There he argued that the American education system wasn’t sufficiently developing the minds of our children for a world becoming progressively more complex, and much of his criticism still rings true today.

However, the following two chapters are not examples of criticism from his books on education, although he does touch on some of those themes. Rather, these chapters are examples of advice he gave to students finishing high school and college. Rickover urges these young people to develop their minds. In formal education, his advice was to be educated in the classical liberal sense before enrolling in a professional education course. But he urges that they also develop their minds informally through reading so they may “live several lives in one.” Rickover concludes by advising them to choose work based on its intellectual stimulations rather than the salary offer—to make their lives “an adventure of the mind,” where one becomes an innovator.





ONE: ENGINEERING OPPORTUNITIES[1]





This is the earliest speech in the book. It was given to the graduating engineering class at Northwestern University, Chicago, on December 2, 1953. Typical for such an occasion, Rickover provides the graduates advice for how best to start their careers and what type of education will best prepare them for their future—with the implicit hope they had received such an education. The speech was given six months after one of Rickover’s greatest accomplishments. On June 25, 1953, the prototype for the USS Nautilus (the Mark I) had reached full power for the first time. Once at full power, Rickover had the Mark I complete a simulated underwater trans-Atlantic voyage from the United States to Fastnet, Ireland, in 96 hours. The demonstration proved beyond a shadow of a doubt the capabilities of a nuclear-powered submarine.





During the past 15 years I have interviewed about 1,000 engineers for employment. Most were recent college graduates. Because the engineers were to work in my own organization and because I well knew that selection and training of personnel is the most important function of an administrator, I devoted considerable time to this problem. If one chooses the right people, there is little else to do.

To put it another way: Everything in the world must be done through and by people.

What I will say tonight about engineers and about education is what I have learned to look for in young men who aspire to successful careers.

I will begin with specific points because these are more easily understood. Later, when I branch off into the generalities you can say to yourselves: “He is now philosophizing and telling us what is wrong with the younger generation. He is telling us, with hindsight, not to do what he did.” You will be perfectly right in feeling this way, and you will be proving the well-known fact that each generation learns only from its own mistakes.

Some of us in the older generation wistfully hope that this need not be so— that you who follow us will learn a little from our mistakes. It has been said that the art of statesmanship consists more in stopping bad things from happening, than in doing good things. If I succeed in stopping one or two of you from doing bad things, I may still qualify as a statesmen.

My first specific criticism is that young men are looking for security in terms of money, rather than opportunity to improve themselves and develop their capabilities. This is a strange phenomenon, indeed, at a time when the standard of living in the U.S. is higher than it has been anywhere, at any time in history. Today, when no one need suffer from privations of hunger, or from lack of clothing or shelter, the desire for security in terms of salary seems to be growing. Now, I can understand this attitude in a workingman, who has no other assets than his hands or his tools, but I cannot understand it in young men who, by means of a university education, profess to be an elite—on whom society has devoted much training, so that they might assume the role of leaders.

This desire for security generally manifests itself in accepting positions, on graduation, where the highest starting salary can be obtained. This is a recent development and has two main causes—one, the large increase in the number of engineers required by industry—from one engineer for every 250 employees in 1900 to one for every 60 in 1951. These figures are the average for all industry. In the electrical industry, however, there is now one engineer for every 20 employees—and with no saturation point in sight.

This situation has been aggravated by the large sums of money spent on research and development in recent years by the Federal Government, particularly since the start of the Korean War.

Two, the engineering schools have not been graduating a sufficient number of engineers to take care of these needs. There is today a shortage of about 30,000 engineers and it will likely be many years before the supply is equal to the demand.

This has placed the young graduate in the position of having great choice in seeking employment, and has led to the situation known as “the granting of interviews” by students about to graduate.

The second reason for the high salaries that are available is brought about by the fact that many companies today have government contracts for which they are reimbursed essentially on a cost plus a fixed fee basis. This permits them to hire large numbers of engineers at inflated salaries—since the government directly or indirectly pays the entire cost.

For these reasons you must not feel that, upon graduation, when your abilities cannot really be known to your employer, a high salary offer is actually deserved.

Another specific point which has struck me is how poorly read are the vast majority of engineering graduates. A very few have read some good books; some read nothing, and the majority have contented themselves with reading current news periodicals and a few bosom novels.

My own belief is that the importance of reading good books has been stressed too much from the cultural standpoint. Young men and women have been urged to read because they would thereby acquire culture, they would become broadminded, or become better citizens, and so on. In other words it was good for one, as going to church.

Now, let us approach it from a different angle—from the one of acquiring learning. Learning can be acquired in 3 ways: by studying and reading, by listening to and observing others, and by doing things one’s self. But the number of years available in a life-time is far too small to acquire learning doing things one’s self, or being told by someone else.

By means of reading it is possible to acquire the experience and learning of many great men in a short time. A book which has required years of sustained effort and the erudition of a great mind can be mastered in a few hours. It is like having the privilege of watching a great brain in operation and picking its choice parts. It offers the ability to multiply ourselves—to live several lives in one.

I could dwell at length on the importance of reading—of the relation to the process of creative thought. I don’t know whether Lowes’ book “The Road to Xanadu” is required reading at Northwestern. I understand it was once at M.I.T. Professor Lowes shows that Coleridge acquired most of his thoughts and phrases for “The Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner” and “Kublai Khan” from the most extensive reading over a period of years—how, through reading and thinking he created a work of art.

Many demands are made of a young man’s time in college and afterwards, and he must constantly be judging these demands and saying to himself: Is this a good thing—will this help me to become a better human being—will this lead me to a better understanding of people and of the world I live in? Or is it shallow and evanescent? I do not mean to imply that one should not enjoy life—but it is possible to enjoy life in a rich manner, rather than in a grubby one.

Another important point is that engineers have learned many facts—but have not learned principles. It is, of course, much easier during a course in calculus or in chemistry to memorize formulas and be able to work many problems. This is particularly the case when a course is difficult and a term exam is in the offing.

What I am now discussing is probably more in the domain and responsibility of the University.

By means of reading it is possible to acquire the experience and learning of many great men in a short time.... It offers the ability to multiply ourselves—to live several lives in one.

But it behooves the student to know that principles are more important than facts, and that they are far more difficult to master. But once the principle is learned it becomes part of us and is never lost. The facts we learn are soon forgotten and their meaning changes with time.

My concept of a good engineering course is one in which the student learns the principles of mathematics, of physics, of mechanics, of metallurgy and of chemistry. A thorough understanding of these leads easily into the more practical aspects of mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, chemical engineering, etc.

All knowledge and all scientific activity [are] somehow, somewhere interrelated, and substantial progress in any pursuit demands a wide generalized interest in many fields, not merely in one narrow specialized field.

Through concentrating on a specialty too early in life, a man becomes a kind of useful machine, but not a harmoniously developed personality. It is essential that the student acquire an understanding for, and a lively feeling for values. Otherwise, with his specialized knowledge, he more closely resembles a well-trained dog, than a harmoniously developed person.

It is vital to a valuable education that independent critical thinking be developed by the young man, a development that is greatly jeopardized by over-burdening with too many and too varied subjects.

When I interview a young man, I am not particularly interested in whether he is an electrical, or mechanical, or metallurgical engineer, because to obtain a degree in one of these subjects merely requires about 100 hours of classroom work. What can one really learn about electrical engineering in 100 hours? I call such engineers “Textbook engineers.” I use electrical engineering as an example, because many years ago I was awarded a Master’s degree in that field—after demonstrating that I could work out a paper design of one or two motors and generators by using a large number of empirical formulae listed in handbooks. I would much rather employ an engineer who had devoted all his time to learning the principles of electricity—because if he knew these it would be easy for him to learn motor or generator design, or any other kind of design.

I do not believe that “practical stuff” should be or can be properly taught in a University. The reason is easy to see. Nearly all college text-books are several years behind current industrial practices. Furthermore, they are written by men who do not have the latest “practical” information, so that they are obsolete even while they are being written.

The employer who wants a “practical” engineering graduate from a university is simply hiring a man who knows how to make the same mistakes which have been made in his plant for the past 10 or 15 years.

If the young engineer is intelligent and enthusiastic, if he is interested in learning, and has enough sense to know that he is bound to be a liability for a year or two in any organization really interested in his welfare—it makes no difference what particular subject he has studied. What counts is: Will he work hard, will he accept responsibility? Another characteristic I have noted in some young engineers is the desire to be placed in charge of something, or a group of people. Our social structure is such that people believe that the measure of one’s importance is the number of people he supervises. On this basis Einstein is not as important as the foreman of a railroad gang.

Today industry recognizes that a good scientist or a good engineer is worth the same salary as a good administrator, and you will find that there is now just as much opportunity, salarywise, in engineering as in administration.

Another characteristic of young engineers is the search for the exact answers and the feeling of frustration if an exact answer is not forthcoming.

This probably stems from the many years of grammar and high school where the answer is always to be found in the back of the book, and the feeling of elation which comes when, after trying several solutions, and looking furtively at the known answer, the latest trial finally works.

Unfortunately, in real life, there are no exact or final answers. I have for some time thought that a few of the ills of today start from this childish faith in the existence of perfect answers. It requires a degree of maturity to realize that all solutions are partial ones.

Just remember that not so very many years ago the correct answer was that the universe consisted of a number of celestial transparent spherical shells in which the stars were fixed—or that the sun revolved about the flat earth. And more recently an eminent physicist stated that all the basic laws of physics were known.

I can sum this up by saying that regularity is abnormal, and that the irregular is always commoner than the regular.

By now you have come to the conclusion that I have violated my agreement to mention nothing but specific points, and have slyly worked in a few principles.

But as I look around the room and can see no outward evidence of sleeping, I feel warranted to proceed on the basis of principle alone.

Let us consider the question of salary. This, in itself, can never be the most important means for happiness, and it is quite obvious that the wealthiest people in the world are not necessarily the happiest. Of course, if a man goes to a university for the sole purpose of bettering his economic status, the earning of a large salary may appear to him to be the one means to happiness. But I am not addressing myself tonight to men with that limited viewpoint. They have the right to their choice, but they are certainly the beneficiaries of a lower than cost tuition, and they are taking advantage of many instructors and professors who teach because of professional duty, and who could command larger salaries in industry.

The greater opportunities which exist today for the satisfaction of material needs and the growing freedom of action that follows from increasing control of Nature expose us to the danger that we shall regard material comfort as the end of civilization rather than the means to its attainment.

The only way in which these dangers can be avoided in a society which rejects the over-riding authority of a Church or a State is through the existence of a minority of individuals capable of securing, by the respect which their own standards evoke, the adherence of the majority of men to higher standards than those they would create for themselves.

The university must train the most diverse kinds of people for a wide variety of future careers. Many of these are potential leaders in various fields. From the university must come the future under-secretary, the politician, the scientist, the surgeon, the teacher, the men of business, and the editor.

How, then, does one achieve success in a profession? Only in exceptional cases is success, as commonly known, the result of skill, and of certain other human qualities like honesty, decency, and integrity. Although the proportion between skill and human qualities on the one hand, and “personality” on the other hand, as prerequisites for success varies, – the “personality” factor always plays a decisive role.

Success, in this sense, depends largely on how well a person sells himself, how well he gets his personality across, whether he is “cheerful,” sound, aggressive, reliable, ambitious—furthermore what his family background is, what clubs he belongs to, and whether he has the respect of people. The fact that in order to have “success” it is not sufficient to have the skill and equipment for performing a given task, but that we must be able to “put across” one’s personality in competition with many others—shapes the attitude toward one’s self.

If it were enough for the purpose of making a living to rely on what one knows and what one can do by himself, esteem would be in proportion to one’s capacities. But since success depends largely on how one sells one’s personality, we experience one’s self as a commodity.

A person is not concerned with his life and happiness, but with becoming saleable.

Many of you will soon be faced with making a choice. Remember that your choice of where you will work and for whom you work is far more important than the starting salary. What you have learned so far is but a small part of what you must know if you are to become competent in your chosen field. The first few years after graduation will largely shape your future.

Several days ago I asked a number of young engineers who are working with me to express their views on this subject. A number of these men took reductions in salary to work where they now are. You may be interested in knowing that every one of them independently arrived at these same conclusions.





TWO: A TALENTED MIND— OPPORTUNITY AND OBLIGATION[1]





This chapter was probably given as a speech in early 1963 and then published in the Saturday Evening Post in May 1963, which is the source of the version herein. The talented high school students Rickover is speaking to appear to have won a scholastic award. The late 1950s and early 1960s were very active times for Rickover in terms of his ideas about education. Besides his three books on education, he broached the subject with President Kennedy in a meeting at the Oval Office where he recommended that Kennedy develop national standards for education. Here he provides a summary of his criticism of the American public education system. But his main purpose is to challenge these young students to continue developing their minds by seeking an intellectual life; a life that he calls an “adventure of the mind.” Rickover understood that as the complexity of everyday technology increased, it would only be through the innovations of “brain power” that society could be sustained.





Looking at the bright faces of the young men and women whose scholastic achievements we honor today, the thought uppermost in my mind is: how fortunate you are! Fortunate that God has blessed you with a priceless gift; giving you the most lasting, the most persistently satisfying, the most allaround useful of natural endowments—a really good mind. Will you recognize the immense opportunity vouchsafed you because of that gift? Will you take full advantage of the wide choice it opens up for you in shaping your lives? Are you aware that talent such as yours imposes obligations; that you will not obtain the satisfaction of fulfilling yourselves unless you meet these obligations?

Children of wealthy parents are said to be born with a silver spoon in their mouth. I would say, you have been born with a platinum spoon. A good mind is rarer than a full bank account. It offers more opportunities for a happy and successful life; it is the most secure of all possessions; it cannot be taken from you.

All the same, I sincerely hope you will not be prideful of your intellectual endowments. They reflect no particular credit on you; you were given them, as other children are given different types of minds. You just happen to have been lucky in life’s lottery.

Like all natural assets, intelligence is a potential, not an actual treasure. By itself it does not automatically guarantee success in life. It is potentially your greatest personal asset; but luck plays a part in whether your innate endowment can come to full fruition.

A good mind may be compared to a vein of precious metal embedded in rock. If it is to be of value, it must first be recognized, then laboriously brought forth and carefully worked over. Do you suppose Einstein would have achieved the scientific formula that changed the concept of the universe if, instead of being the child of Europeans, growing up in a scientifically advanced society that spots genius early and cultivates it assiduously, he had been born among Australian aborigines?

Geography has much to do with the development of human talent. This is why I feel so strongly that we should have a national scholastic standard in our country—a permissive one of course, given our form of government— so that local communities would have a yardstick to measure their schools and hold them to scholastic levels as high as those of schools in other sections of the country. The mere existence of a national standard in education would eliminate much of the element of chance in the realization of the intellectual endowments of American children. We have far more geographic inequality of educational opportunities than other advanced democracies. Surely, anything we can do to diminish the part luck plays in developing the wealth of talent we possess makes practical sense; it also accords with our commitment to equality of opportunity.

What we cannot do, of course, is insure that every bright child is motivated to develop his mind. This requires long and sustained effort on his part. It is as true today as a hundred years ago that, to quote Elizabeth Barrett Browning, “knowledge of suffering entereth.” We cannot spare our children the labor of becoming educated. No machine, no gimmick, can relieve them of the necessary exertions. Often we glibly assume that just as machines can be devised to take on the world’s hard physical labor and boring routine chores, so can we shift the burden of learning—and of teaching—to mechanical gadgets. It simply cannot be done.

Motivation is partly a matter of native endowment, partly one of education and environment. Einstein might not have done anything worthwhile with his fine mind if by temperament he had been lazy, or timidly conformist, or if a bad home background had led him into delinquency. Paganini might not have become the supreme violinist he was if he had never seen a violin or never received the instruction or done the practicing required to develop his talent.

You are here today because you have taken the first step toward developing your intellectual assets; you have given your mind what it most needs—exercise in meeting diverse and difficult challenges. That you made this choice instead of just coasting along in school, having an easy time of it, you surely owe in part to the advice, aid and support given you by devoted adults—parents, teachers, perhaps someone who merely happened to be present at the decisive moment and who influenced your decision to choose a road that may take you into the realm of really advanced learning. You may take pride in that you have not buried your talent. I hope you will also be duly grateful that all the chance elements that open up a career in the realm of the intellect have come out right for you.

So far you have gone only a little way on a long road. It is steep and rock strewn; at times you may be tempted to abandon it. There are easier ways of life and many of them offer higher material rewards. But if you choose them, you will, in the end, be left with a sense of deep inner dissatisfaction. People are happiest when they fulfill themselves at the highest level within their reach. I urge that you let nothing deflect you from climbing onward until you have realized your full potentialities and are ready to put them to use for your own benefit, for your community and for your country.

A great advantage of pursuing a career in the learned professions or in the higher reaches of the academic disciplines is that success depends almost exclusively on what you as an individual accomplish. Here is one area of life where merit really counts for more than position, personal background and connections, or the favor of powerful men. You are truly on your own. Moreover, you need not harm others in order to succeed. There are many occupations where a man may have to decide between personal benefit and public good; happily, you are most unlikely to be faced with this choice. If you are good in your chosen career, what benefits you will almost always benefit your fellow man and your country as well.

America is in great need of the services of its talented youth. In government, in industry, in every major field of human activity there is crying need for highly educated persons with above average minds—all the way from trained technicians, through the learned professions, to highest level scholars working at the frontiers of knowledge. Such people are desperately needed yet in short supply; without them our complex society cannot function properly. This is evident to anyone who gives the matter thought.

Not so evident to the general public is the role educated brain power can play in helping offset the loss of many of the unique advantages we once possessed and on which the Founding Fathers counted to insure the success of American democracy.

We started our life as an independent nation under the most favorable of circumstances. Among our blessings were vast resources in unclaimed land and mineral wealth, scarcity of people, de facto equality among nearly all citizens, geographic isolation from trouble spots of the world. When we had these advantages, we took them for granted. We hardly noticed as one by one they disappeared. To the Founding Fathers their importance for the success of democracy was evident. They never expected we should lose them in so short a time.

Jefferson, for instance, believed there would be free land for many generations to come, and we would remain a country of independent farmers, artisans and merchants. Beholden to no master, Americans would know how to exercise the duties of democratic citizenship; possessing property themselves, they would know how to manage public affairs with sober skill. Political equality would be assured by availability of free land, since this would equalize wealth. The Founding Fathers counted on geographic distance to keep us out of Europe’s wars and safe from foreign invasion.

Today, alas, nine out of ten Americans work for others; seven out of ten live in crowded cities or suburbs; we have a greater gap in wealth than many other Western nations. Saddest of all, the sense of personal worth and dignity has become difficult to retain. Earlier Americans possessed this to an extraordinary degree, because they knew they were needed; many presentday Americans face the constant threat of being replaced by machines.

The nation, too, has lost something of its former sense of security; the oceans that once guarded us have now turned into avenues of attack. Technology has destroyed our political isolation and the independence of action it gave. Our profligacy has hastened the end of economic selfsufficiency. As recently as 50 years ago we still had a surplus of raw materials; we then exported 15 percent of our production. Today we must import ten percent of the raw materials we need. The turning point occurred at mid-century when we began to become dependent on world markets.

From a scarcely populated, fabulously resources-rich country 185 years ago we have changed to a densely populated, resources-poor country today. We are, of course, not as poor in resources nor as heavily populated as most of the industrial powers of the world. We are still rich compared to such countries as Britain or Italy. In fact, with but ten percent of the population of the free world and eight percent of its land area, we consume close to half the free world’s volume of materials. These figures are frequently used to show we have the highest standard of living in the world. What is more significant is that they also indicate our increasing dependence on foreign countries for vitally needed minerals and fuels. At present, we are truly independent only in two metals: molybdenum and magnesium. When measured against our wealth of but a few short years ago, we are therefore poor, and poorer still when measured against our future needs.

The shrinking of the once broad materials base of our industrial civilization makes us, for the first time, dependent on foreign countries for materials basic to our technical organization. So far we have had no difficulty buying what we need abroad. We may, indeed, never have to face the disaster which threatened Europe’s economic life when some years ago the flow of Middle East oil was cut off for political reasons. But it would not be wise to count on this.

Dependence on imports of indispensable raw materials compels us to compete in world markets, since we must pay for imports with money earned by exports. This diminishes our economic independence. Industrial practices that suit us, but raise the cost of American goods above those of other highly advanced countries, may have to be altered. Can we forever afford a wage and salary scale greatly higher than that of Europe? Now that the Common Market has become a flourishing reality, the advantage we once possessed of having the largest domestic consumer market—which made mass production possible here while most of our competitors had too small a market to do likewise—this advantage is gone. For the first time we must worry about a drain on our gold reserves.

Let me show you how the loss of some of these once uniquely American advantages can be offset through the efforts of men of high intellect and rigorous education. Take our dependence on raw material imports.

Brain power applied to this problem can devise ways of extracting at reasonable cost the considerable store of low grade minerals and fuels still remaining to us, but which we are not utilizing because of high cost in time and labor—thus taconite and shale oil may in time make up for the threatened deficit in high grade ores and oil.

Brain power may discover ways of replacing scarce materials with plentiful materials heretofore unusable, as aluminum is now replacing copper.

Trained minds may be able to relieve shortages of natural minerals and fuels by creating substitutes, as plastics and synthetic rubber have reduced our dependence on imported tin and natural rubber, or as atomic power may replace coal and oil. Similarly, synthetic products made from renewable resources may serve as substitutes for irreplaceable materials.

Probably we need brain power most to teach us the folly of needlessly wasting the inheritance of our posterity. Using nonrenewable materials is like using capital instead of living on earnings or interest. No matter how slowly capital is depleted, the day must come when nothing will be left. For almost two centuries we have been wasteful because we foolishly imagined our natural resources to be inexhaustible.

It will take wise and intelligent guidance to change our ways. Eventually we may learn to deny ourselves today’s pleasures for the sake of leaving enough for our children so they too may enjoy the blessings of civilized living. We may even learn to deny ourselves such agreeable luxuries as large, chrome-trimmed cars, powered by high-octane gas which discharges thousands of tons of scarce and irreplaceable lead into the air. Changes in national outlook such as these can only be pioneered by people whose minds can grasp the scientific problems involved, and who can make the average citizen understand them.

The truism needing no elaboration is that as a society becomes technologically more complex, it needs proportionately more, as well as qualitatively better, trained professionals. Thus, while the population of the United States doubled in the last 50 years, the number of professional men and women quadrupled. We have today five times more engineers and ten times more scientists than half a century ago, yet there are still not enough. To increase our national product by a given percentage annually we must increase our scientific and engineering personnel almost twice as fast. Every step forward in technological progress makes the nation more dependent on trained brain power.

Or take the soul-destroying problem of chronic unemployment that hangs over many people whose endowments are average or below; who therefore, in many cases, can be replaced by machines. You are fortunate in that the kind of thinking you are capable of, hence the kind of contribution you are able to make, cannot be duplicated by a mechanical robot. You are, moreover, able to alleviate technological unemployment by creating new industries, and hence new jobs. Let me give you the gist of an address by Dr. Lloyd Berkner, President of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest in Dallas, Texas, which is most illuminating on this point. The speech—called “The Technological Revolution of Today: Its Impact on Society”—was given last January at the Franklin Institute.

Dr. Berkner brings out the immensely important fact that today the greatest source of wealth of any nation is educated brain power. In the past, wealth was derived from the application of labor to basic resources. But the science of today has created a new source of wealth—innovations derived from science, and new technologies created by brain power.

Given our explosive population growth and the strong and seemingly irreversible trend toward automation, the problem of finding jobs for all Americans appears insoluble with the existing framework of production and service. Dr. Berkner shows that enlargement of employment opportunities depends on the creation of new industry. As he puts it: “No longer can mere labor applied to natural resources enlarge our product market. An intervening ingredient—brain power—must be available to provide the innovation that can expand our economy into new products and services. So brain power becomes the resource upon which our nation must depend for its future economic and social health.” He notes in particular that “Brain power has become the principal source of future welfare of the 100 great metropolitan areas that soon will contain the bulk of the American population.”

What may surprise most Americans is that every scientist and engineer trained up to a Ph.D. level is now a source of employment for many others. As a rough calculation, for each Ph.D. we can employ five to ten engineers, and for each engineer we can use ten to 15 skilled workers. Dr. Berkner goes on to say: “But the creation of new industry, new products and devices, new methods and applications from the new technology arises from the creative and imaginative insights of scientific and technological leaders who have access to the very limits of knowledge. Without that flavor of top skill for real innovation, men of lesser skills will lose their opportunity. . . . In the future we may have to count 100 or more unemployed for each Ph.D. we fail to educate.”

In the light of these facts, we should be deeply concerned that despite all the money spent on education we do not produce a sufficient number of Ph.D.’s; on a per capita basis we barely produce as many Ph.D.’s as most European countries. If we count only those of our Ph.D.’s who are truly comparable scholastically to European Ph.D.’s we find that we definitely lag behind. This is one reason why we import so many foreign Ph.D.’s, to the chagrin and anger of countries that have spent much public money to educate them.

Apart from these specific contributions toward making ours a viable, smoothly functioning steadily advancing economy, educated brain power can help the American people to a better understanding of the new science and technology that so deeply affects all our lives. Technology, that is the utilization of science for practical purposes, has such enormous potential for the good or evil of man and society that how we use it requires careful rethinking. We have here a complex problem that calls for a higher order of intelligence than has so far been applied; we have left it almost entirely to the management of practical men.

With due respect to the accomplishments of practical men, to whom we owe our material comforts and luxuries, I believe one can fairly say the practical approach to the new scientific discovery is narrow, short-range and private; it is concerned with ways to put the discovery to use in the most economical and efficient manner, little thought being given to side effects and future consequences. The intellectual approach—if I may use that term—is broad, long-range and public; it looks to the effects which the use of a new discovery may have on people in general, on the nation, perhaps on the world; present and future.

I can best illustrate what I want to bring out by a simple example. Commercial deep-sea fishing can be done so efficiently with modern techniques that a relatively few enterprises could rapidly sweep the oceans free of commercial fish and whales. Left to themselves, this is what the fishermen of all nationalities would do. As practical men they are interested only in how new technology will increase their catch, preserve it and get it speedily to market. They have been ingenious in pursuing this short-range private objective. Figuratively speaking, the world’s marine scholars have stood by wringing their hands at this “practical” folly. To them it has been incomprehensible that reasonable human beings should fail to see that in the end far more can be taken from the sea if fishing conforms to sensible conservation regulations permitting the species to reproduce itself.

Conservation has had hard sledding in this country. We have a predilection for believing practical men when they assure us our resources are unlimited, and to pooh-pooh the warnings of scholars and conservationists as coming from ivy-tower eggheads.

Half a century ago, Theodore Roosevelt’s drive for scientific forest management was laughed out of court by practical lumbermen who assured us our virgin forest stands were inexhaustible. We are still far behind Europe in conserving forests; we still waste timber needlessly. Yet consider how important a tree is, besides furnishing wood when it is felled. Its roots hold the topsoil and prevent it from washing to the sea; they help slow the downflow of torrential rains, thus diminishing the dangers of floods; they build up our water tables. Many trees, so writes human ecologist S.P.R. Charter in a book just off the press, “in adding one pound to their weight, use and discharge into the atmosphere approximately 35 gallons of clean water. By comparison, a pound of steel uses some 20 gallons of water in its manufacture; a pound of rayon uses some 180 gallons . . . Much of this industrial water is not re-usable. How many pounds of tree does a human need in his lifetime, for his body and spirit?”[2] (italics mine)

These are not purely academic questions for present-day Americans. Many of us already live in areas having intermittent water shortages. We have as yet no practical means that will guarantee availability of enough cheap clean water a decade or so from now when we shall urgently need new sources of supply. It is estimated that merely to remedy existing municipal and industrial water pollution would cost the American taxpayer twelve billion dollars, besides large additional sums to keep our lakes and rivers clean thereafter.[3]

Thoughtful Americans are calling attention to the fact that nature, if abused, will strike back. We are beginning to perceive that activities which in the past could be safely left to practical men making private decisions now involve such complex relationships and such potentially dangerous consequences that we need to take counsel with our men of science, our scholars in the humanities, with our country’s most highly trained intellects. What these contribute is a deep understanding of man and of nature; they look upon technology from a broader, more humanly oriented viewpoint. Those who have studied particular aspects of nature are far more knowledgeable in this field than most practical men. A plant biologist knows a great deal about pesticides even though he has never had to meet a payroll! We need all the intelligence and all the expert advice we can muster merely to understand the problems science and technology create, let alone to solve them in a manner that will preserve our free way of life.

Not only in technology but in other areas of life as well we depend increasingly on people with trained minds. Most of the big and vexing problems with which we grapple today are of a kind that such people alone can hope to solve. The simpler, practical problems that occupied much of our thinking in the past are well on the way to a satisfactory solution.

Thus we know how to produce immense amounts of attractive consumer goods, but we don’t know how to create enough purchasing power within our free enterprise system to get them off the shelves.

We know how to obtain large crops from our land but not how to protect ourselves against careless use of dangerous pesticides and weed killers.

We are marvelously ingenious in harnessing water power but helpless in preventing pollution of our rivers and lakes which makes them poisonous for fish and useless for recreation, not to mention the resultant deterioration in the quality of our drinking water.

We have learned how to launch satellites into space but not how to protect our once gloriously beautiful land against relentless commercial depredation which creates landscapes as ugly as anything our astronauts will find on dead moons or planets.

We know how to produce and distribute gadgets galore for artificial recreation, but not how to provide our children with a natural environment where they can play in safety; we can’t even guard our remaining national wilderness areas against the insistent demand of those who would appropriate them for industrial use. No nature lover can help being heartsick that something so rare and beautiful as Indiana sand dunes is being bulldozed off the earth.

We need courageous men who will strive to preserve a bit of nature for future Americans, but the pressures are strong against those who think in terms of the needs of generations to come, not just of present-day desires for quick benefits.

Though you will presumably choose scientific careers, I hope you will concern yourselves with unsolved problems such as these. You have the capacity to contribute to the resolution of all sorts of public issues that, strictly speaking, are not within your area of specialization. A good mind, liberally educated by formal schooling or through self-education, can be profitably applied to solving any problem that calls for analysis, clarity of thought and logical reasoning. It is your right and your privilege as citizens of a democracy to participate in shaping your country’s destiny; to contribute your efforts to the betterment of society and the strengthening of the nation.

Do not become discouraged by those who argue that good though a man be as a scientist, when he concerns himself with problems outside his profession, he is no more competent than the average citizen. This is one of those superficially persuasive half-truths repeated so often that they assume the sanctity of dogma.

Persons of modest endowment and undistinguished education rightly feel that whatever competence they may have lies exclusively in the career for which they have been specially trained; they err when they assert that the same holds true for everyone. The ability to apply oneself to a broad range of problems and catholicity of interests is precisely what distinguishes the person of exceptional intelligence from the average man. To be sure, intelligent people may be stupid in some things. As I stressed earlier, a good mind is a potential, not an actual treasure. The brightest person must apply himself assiduously in order to contribute to the solution of a problem new to him.

Given the importance of the contributions trained brain power makes to our society, we have been surprisingly reluctant to respect intelligence, to give it its just due. In the past, there was good reason to admire human qualities other than pure intellect. During the first 300 years of our history the rough work that had to be done to make this continent habitable for civilized people absorbed all our energies. This kind of work had long since been completed abroad, and Europe had gone on from there to build a civilization which put great stress on cultivating human talent.

The settlers who crossed the Atlantic moved back a thousand years into the past to take on the conquest of a wilderness—just as their forebears had to conquer the wilderness that covered Northern Europe at the time of the Fall of Rome. Meanwhile Europe, having conquered her own wilderness proceeded to produce literary and artistic work of great merit; to create splendid educational facilities; to make all the basic scientific discoveries on which the Industrial and the new Scientific Revolution rests; and to take great strides technologically.

Until we got our own rough work done and caught up with Europe culturally, there was bound to be a great difference in the kind of human qualities most valued here and abroad, hence the kind of people for whom either America or Europe was the land of opportunity. This difference in value of human qualities has caused much misunderstanding and consequent antagonism.

It is well to keep in mind that it was not because of some sort of magic in American life that, by merely moving from Europe to America, a man could increase his wages for the very same work. The reason was simply that here men were scarce and ordinary labor was greatly needed, while in Europe there were more laborers than jobs.

America was, in turn, a land of dazzling opportunity for men and women whose intellectual and educational attainments might be modest, but who had the stout hearts and strong arms most needed during pioneering days. Then, when the Industrial Revolution belatedly reached our shores, it was practical men who came into their own; men adept at taking the products of European inventiveness and putting them to use in ways that suited the special kind of life in this new raw country; where people were scarce, hence valuable; while land and natural resources were abundant, hence expendable. Impatient for quick profits, these practical men proceeded to exploit our resources with ruthless efficiency, building a fabulously productive economy, though at the cost of great waste of irreplaceable natural wealth. No one minded the waste; Americans were intoxicated with material affluence and admired the men who created it for them.

Now that our once abundant natural wealth has shrunk and our once scanty population has soared, we are becoming more like Europe in the social, political and economic problems we face and the kind of human competencies we urgently need. Sputnik scared us to re-evaluate and reverse our traditional contempt for intellectuals—for scientists at least. It is to be hoped we will not wait too long before we shed anti-intellectualism entirely. Scholars in the humanities are as valuable, if not more so, to a civilized modern country as scientists, engineers and physicians, or, for that matter, artists and writers. It makes no sense at our level of civilization to indulge in hostility toward what are scornfully called intellectual “elites.”

No modern nation can afford to let talent go to waste. It makes no sense to close our eyes to the fact that, at least at the secondary level, bright youngsters need separate schooling. They need different, more demanding curricula and far more intelligent and more highly educated teachers if they are to be accorded true educational equality; that is, schooling that serves their own peculiar needs as adequately as schooling of a different kind will suit children with nonacademic minds.

Alone among advanced democracies, we cling to the concept of a 12 year comprehensive school which robs our talented youth of three to four of their best learning years. I will not delve into the motives that perpetuate this incredible folly, but at bottom I think one would find an unintelligent and confused misconception of democracy that confounds political and intellectual equality.

When I first pleaded for recognition of the needs of talented children, I was accused of foisting an “un-American,” “aristocratic,” “elite” education on our hapless youth, of which to “educate the best and shoot the rest,” and similar nonsense. I have no power to foist anything on anybody, but surely I have as much right to advocate good basic education as the lovers of the progressive philosophy have of advocating life-adjustment and similar stuff. They are the ones who have foisted their brand of schooling on our children without—to my knowledge—ever obtaining a mandate from the American people.

Equality of opportunity is a splendid thing that we have always and will always cherish. But downgrading everyone to a mediocre level in order that no one will feel slighted is maudlin egalitarianism and in a deep sense unAmerican. The Founding Fathers clearly distinguished between political and intellectual equality. Jefferson urged that “we dream of an aristocracy of achievement arising out of a democracy of opportunity.” Another signer of the Declaration of Independence, John Adams, wrote to John Taylor: “That all men are born to equal rights is clear. Every being has a right to his own, as moral, as sacred, as any other has. . . . But to teach that all men are born to equal powers and faculties . . . is as gross a fraud, as glaring an imposition on the credulity of the people, as ever was practiced. . . . For honor’s sake . . . for truth and virtue’s sake, let American philosophers and politicians despise it.”

I have devoted this speech to talented youth because the subject seemed appropriate for the occasion. I would not like to be understood as being interested only in bright children and their need for a good education. All children need the very best schooling we can devise for them. What they are getting today falls far short of this aim. It is time to reassess what we have been doing to the future of America by neglecting to remedy this situation. I have found it humiliating that my studies showed quite small and poor countries providing better schooling than we.

Currently a lot of experimenting with all sorts of gimmicks is going on— including teaching machines based on experiments with pigeons and rats!— and we are constantly being told that the schools are now vastly improved. Yet the two basic reforms that alone will make us competitive in education with other advanced countries have not been carried through.

I have mentioned the necessity of providing separate secondary schools for different levels of academic aptitude and educational aims. All European democracies have these in their free school systems; only we keep calling this “undemocratic.”

The other essential reform has to do with a complete reversal of the position of the American teacher. The teacher is the pivot on which the whole educational effort rests. As I have said so many times, we must raise teacher qualifications as well as rewards, so as to attract high caliber people into this all important profession. And we must put the school system in the charge of the teachers, supplying them with the necessary clerical and administrative personnel. All European democracies have teacher-run school systems. That is why they are so good.

Let me in conclusion wish you the best of luck, and urge you to make your life an adventure of the mind. This will at times be hard, but always deeply rewarding. When you reap the fruits of your own intellectual labor you will experience the satisfaction of having proved yourselves good cultivators of the talents given you by Providence. Over and above all this, you will know that yours is a kind of pioneering which yields not alone personal gain and satisfaction, but also contributes significantly to the economic, hence the political strength and security of our country. This you will find the greatest reward of all.





PART II: THREE AMERICAN INNOVATORS





The biographical sketches that follow may seem out of place in a book on technology and engineering. But Rickover’s perspectives on the lives of Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Edison, and George Washington Carver—three technological innovators— are as insightful of the author as they are of the subjects. There simply is no hiding the admiration Rickover had for these men and their desire to develop their minds. And he successfully makes the connection between this desire for knowledge and their innovative accomplishments. Their lives are models for us all.

Rickover wrote these sketches during the sea trials of Polaris submarines named after these men. He included them in letters he sent to the members of Congress involved in appropriations for shipbuilding. Congress thought so much of Rickover’s sketches that they published them in Eminent Americans: Namesakes of the Polaris Submarine Fleet (1972). It is arguably his best book.





THREE: USS BENJAMIN FRANKLIN[1]





This biographical sketch was written aboard the USS Benjamin Franklin during its initial sea trials in August/September 1965.





Named for Benjamin Franklin (1706–90), one of the most illustrious of our Founding Fathers. A plain man of the people, his life was the American success story writ large. In his autobiography he speaks of his “lowly beginnings” and notes with quiet pride that he “emerged from the poverty and obscurity” of his birth to “a state of affluence and some degree of reputation in the world.” He did so purely on merit for he was, in every sense of the word, a self-made man, owing little if anything to luck or the assistance of others, never pushing ahead at the expense of a fellow man.

Franklin was the youngest son of a poor tallow chandler who had migrated to Boston from England and married, as his second wife, the daughter of a former indentured serving maid. With 17 children to raise, he could give Benjamin only 2 to 3 years of schooling, but he encouraged him to study on his own, a habit which was to remain with Franklin all his life. At 10 the boy went to work in the family shop; at 12 he was apprenticed to his half brother to learn the printing trade, this being considered a suitable vocation for one whose love of books was already manifest.

In later life Franklin often remarked that he could not remember a time when he did not read. Books were his teachers. Through them he made himself a well-educated man. Taking the best authors as his models, he worked hard at perfecting his writing, eventually achieving a simple, lucid style. His thirst for knowledge never ceased. Since he wanted to read foreign books, he decided at 27—a busy young merchant—to teach himself to do so. “I soon made myself so much the master of the French,” he remarked, “as to be able to read the books with ease, I then undertook the Italian.” Later on, “with a little painstaking, acquired as much of the Spanish as to read their books also.” He read not only for instruction but for enjoyment. His taste was catholic. All his life, men of learning and position, who would ordinarily not bother with an artisan, sought Franklin’s company. He supposed it was because “reading had so improved my mind that my conversation was valued.”

Franklin by age 17 had learned all his brother could teach him and was ready to make his own way in the world. He went to New York but could find no work there, so continued on to Philadelphia. This is how he describes his arrival there after a long and uncomfortable trip—walking 50 miles, getting nearly shipwrecked, and helping to row a boat part of the way: “I was dirty from my journey; my pockets were stuffed out with shirts and stockings; I knew no soul, nor where to look for lodging. I was fatigued with traveling, rowing, and want of rest. I was very hungry and my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch Dollar. . ..” He bought three large bread rolls. Wandering about town, munching, he met a fellow traveler. He gave her and her child two of his rolls. Thus did Franklin enter the town that was to become his permanent home, where he would rise to wealth and fame.

Seven years later he owned his own print shop, a stationery store, and a newspaper. He had in the meantime perfected his art by working for 18 months in England and could do the most intricate and difficult print jobs. At 26 he began the highly profitable annual publication of Poor Richard’s Almanac. He managed his affairs so ably that at 42 he retired with an income equivalent to that of a royal governor. Though he was good at it, money-making never interested him, except as a means to obtain leisure for the things he really enjoyed: reading, study, scientific experimentation, social discourse and correspondence with men of similar interests.

While still a journeyman printer, he had founded a club for sociability and self-improvement, called the Junto, of which he later said that it was “the best school of philosophy, morals and politics” then existing in Pennsylvania. Its membership of about 12 consisted of alert, intelligent young artisans, tradesmen and clerks who liked to read and debate. They met Friday evenings to discuss history, ethics, poetry, travels, mechanic arts and science (then called “natural philosophy”). It had been said of this group that it “brought the Enlightenment in a leather apron to Philadelphia.”

Franklin, who was full of ideas for improving life in Philadelphia and the Colonies in general, submitted all his proposals to the Junto where they were debated. Once accepted, members worked hard to get them put into effect. As a result, improvements were made in paving, lighting and policing the town; a volunteer fire department and militia were formed; a municipal hospital was established; the foundations were laid for what became the University of Pennsylvania and the American Philosophical Society. Of most lasting importance, perhaps, was Franklin’s plan for a subscription library, the first in the Colonies. Access to books, he felt, meant that “the doors to wisdom were never shut.” The idea caught on. He noted with satisfaction that the numerous libraries springing up everywhere “have improved the general conversation of Americans, made the common tradesmen and farmers as intelligent as most gentlemen from other countries, and perhaps have contributed in some degree to the stand so generally made throughout the colonies in defense of their privileges.” The value of knowledge to man and society has never been put more succinctly.

When he was 40, Franklin discovered electricity. It was then a sort of magic, a parlor trick. Franklin—ably supported by his Junto—threw himself into experimentation and developed a workable theory which he proved in his famous kite experiment. In the 6 years between 1746 and 1752 his contributions to electricity changed it from a curiosity to a science, and in the process made him world famous. His writings on electricity were compared with Newton’s Optics; he became the friend of most contemporary scientists, was made a member of virtually every scientific society and received honorary degrees from 20 universities. He was sent to Paris, as America’s first ambassador to a major power; the admiration of France for Franklin’s scientific achievement in catching lightning and putting it to man’s use contributed not a little to the successes of his mission: winning the help of France to the Revolutionary cause.

As a man of leisure, Franklin found himself more and more drawn into public service, this being expected of anyone who had the time and ability to serve. He became a member of the Pennsylvania Legislature, the Committee of Five charged with drafting the Declaration of Independence, the Second Continental Congress and the Constitutional Convention. In one way or another, he represented America abroad a total of 25 years, becoming an exceedingly skillful diplomat. His statement, in hearings before Parliament, of the case of the Colonies against the hated Stamp Act was masterly and helped bring about the repeal of this Act. He was among the first to recognize that not merely “taxation” but “legislation in general” without representation could not be borne by Englishmen, whether they lived at home or abroad. The bond uniting England and its Colonies, he argued, was the King, not Parliament. Had his “dominion status theory” been accepted, the war might have been prevented but, as he sadly remarked, “there was not enough wisdom.”

At 65, Franklin began his autobiography, intending it for his son. When pressure of public duties interrupted work on the book, one of his friends pleaded with him to complete it. All that had happened to Franklin, he urged, was of great historic interest since it was “connected with the detail of the manners and situation of a rising people.” Moreover, the way he had planned and conducted his life was “a sort of key and explained many things that all men ought to have once explained to them, to give them a chance of becoming wise by foresight.”

His philosophy of life, the virtues he cultivated—competent workmanship, honesty, industry and frugality—are within everyone’s grasp; they are as important to a good and successful life today as in his time. No American child ought to grow to adulthood without having read the autobiography of this talented, wise and good man who personified all that is best in America. “Merely by being himself,” wrote Mark van Doren, “he dignified and glorified his country.”





FOUR: USS THOMAS A. EDISON[1]





This short biographical sketch was written aboard the USS Thomas A. Edison during its initial sea trials in late 1961.





Named for Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931), one of the most fertile inventors of all time. A sampling of his more than 1,000 patents shows the wide range of his technical interest. Some were for improvements, big and small, of existing artifacts (the quadruple telegraph repeater for simultaneous dispatch of several messages over a single wire, transmission developments for the telephone, a separator for extraction of low-grade ores); others were for original inventions of major importance, such as the phonograph (1877) and the incandescent lamp (1879). There were devices concerned with the telegraph, the telephone, the electric dynamo, the electric locomotive, the storage battery, the kinematic camera; there were processes involving production of very thin sheet metal, of photographic film for motion pictures, for constructing concrete buildings, electric transmission of power (designed in conjunction with his incandescent lamp) and his railway signal system. There were an electric pen, a microphone, and many, many more. When Congress awarded him a gold medal in his 81st year, a rough estimate of the value of his inventions was put at over $15 billion.

European honors had come to him long before. France made him a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor when he was but 31, and a Commander 11 years later; Italy, a Grand Officer of the Crown when he was 42. Britain gave him the Albert Medal of the Society of Arts when he was 45.

Possibly his greatest single invention was the art of inventing itself, through systematic teamwork as at his Menlo Park and East Orange industrial laboratories (the first of their kind in the world). Edison was the first great organizer of inventive effort and one of the last to keep the enterprise in his own hands, from original idea through the long process of experimentation leading to the desired product and its commercial marketing. A technical man himself, he understood that inventiveness— whether individual or collective—flourishes best in an atmosphere of freedom, where the productive men are protected against interference by nontechnical “administrators.” After Edison, invention became a virtual monopoly of huge private and public bureaucracies managed by nontechnical “organization men,” overfond of administrative charts and regulations. Edison’s staff of scientists and technologists worked their heads off because he worked with them and harder than any of them, and because he made invention a challenge and an exciting adventure. Compared to modern industrial laboratories, his were crude and seemingly unorganized, but their per capita output of original ideas and products has never been equaled.

The story of Edison the inventor with its triumphs and defeats (there were almost as many of the latter as of the former) is interesting enough, but less so than the story of Edison the poor, severely handicapped boy who did a man’s work from age 12 onward, yet found time to educate himself entirely on his own. His was a Horatio Alger story with the element of luck left out, for Edison earned every good thing that came his way. It has been suggested that Horatio Alger patterned his young heroes after Edison who was then already a legend—the “wizard of Menlo Park” who could invent absolutely everything and whose inventions were easily understood and appreciated by everybody. Unlike “pure” scientists who produced speculative theories whose values are rarely evident to the general public, Edison was a genuine folk hero, revered for the benefactions his inventions bestowed on mankind. Despite his later wealth, he seemed close to ordinary people; much of the story of his life was of a kind they could seek to emulate.

Born in Milan, Ohio, part-Dutch, part-English by descent, Edison came of a numerous clan of hardworking, long-lived, extraordinary prolific farmers and tradesman; skilled workers, enjoying modest prosperity when times were good, relapsing into near poverty when they were bad. Of education they had little, but to a man they took an interest in public affairs and were noted for independence of mind and rebelliousness of spirit. Twice in three generations they crossed the Canadian–American border as political refugees. Great-grandfather John, who had been brought from Holland to New Jersey by his widowed mother in 1730 (when he was 3), remained loyal to the English King during the American Revolution. He was one of the 30,000 Loyalists who fought as bravely for England as the revolutionaries fought for independence. John served under Howe, was condemned by a Revolutionary court to be hanged as a traitor but released upon intervention of relatives on the Revolutionary side. Together with 80,000 other Loyalists, he was resettled by Britain in Canada. Father Samuel took part in the illstarred Canadian rebellion against the King (1837) and had to run 80 miles to find refuge in the United States, pursued by the King’s men and Indian guides and dogs. Twenty-five years later, Samuel was again on the run, this time from a mob of Unionists in Detroit whose anger he had aroused by his outspoken opposition to Lincoln and the Civil War. Edison himself grew up in a community of Jacksonian radicals. Though later in life he voted Republican, he never became as tractable as the Eastern capitalists who financed his inventions would have liked him to be.

He was the first of his family to rise in the world. The Edison individualism and determination, not to say obstinacy, were as important to his success as his own mechanical genius. He had need of a stout heart and a determined spirit; for deafness, poverty, and lack of formal schooling (especially in higher mathematics and theoretical science) proved frustrating handicaps to a career as inventor. Poverty may have aggravated his loss of hearing and certainly deprived him of higher education.

The deafness is believed to have been caused by scarlatina followed by severe middle ear infections which received no medical attention but were treated by home remedies and patent medicines. Though Edison bore his affliction cheerfully and managed his life so that he could do without normal hearing, he sadly wrote in his diary, “I have never heard a bird sing since I was twelve years old.”

It was bad luck that he contracted scarlatina at the very moment (1852) when the family finances suffered total collapse, as did those of virtually everyone else in their home town. Milan was typical of many American communities which existed only to serve a single commercial enterprise, in this case the Erie Canal. With the coming of the railroad, the canal was shut down for it could not compete with this new form of transportation. Father Edison, who had been doing quite well (they owned a sizeable house and property) moved promptly to the nearest railroad depot, Port Huron, Mich., but he was never again able to achieve the modest prosperity the family enjoyed in Milan.

His illness delayed young Edison’s enrollment in school until he was 8. Already an “experimenter” in miniature who had to see the reason for every new item of knowledge before he was prepared to accept it, he could not respond to the rote teaching typical of one-room rural schools. To an unimaginative teacher, a bored child will often seem stupid. One day, the boy overheard her call him “addled,” whereupon he ran home in anger, declaring firmly he would never return to school. In this decision he was backed by his mother who recognized her son’s unusual reasoning power and undertook to teach him herself. Nothing better could have happened to young Edison.

The daughter and sister of Baptist ministers, Nancy Edison had received a somewhat better than average education and had briefly taught school before marriage. Mother and son were in such close rapport that she instinctively found the right methods for arousing his interests in the subjects she taught him. Better read than most women of her time, she passed on to him her love of good books, reading to him at elementary age the English classics from Shakespeare to Dickens and the historical works of Gibbon, Hume, and Sears. At 9, the boy read such books himself. His mother had given him what formal schooling so often fails to give: the necessary tool for continued self-education.

Even today, books are for those who love them and have good minds; the best and cheapest and most easily accessible “teaching machines.” Edison later told how at 15 he became a member of the Detroit Public Library and found there a refuge in the loneliness that came with growing loss of hearing. “I started with the first book on the bottom shelf and went through the lot, one by one. I didn’t read a few books. I read the library”— from Victor Hugo’s Les Miserables to Newton’s Principles, from Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy to the Penny Library Encyclopedia. This random sampling of the whole range of literature saved Edison from the narrow outlook that so often afflicts men of specialized talent who have had no formal schooling.

His mother even started him on the road that led to the career for which he had so eminent a talent and where he was little handicapped by deafness. He was 9 when she found for him an elementary textbook outlining experiments in chemistry and physics that he was able to copy in a little laboratory he built in a corner of the cellar. Thereafter he never ceased experimenting—as child and youth, in manhood and in high old age.

Books and experiments were his pleasure as well as the means to his spectacular worldly success. “My mother was the making of me,” he often remarked. Indeed, she guided him well. Few men are fortunate enough to discover a career that totally absorbs their interest and thus by itself gives them a full and happy life, regardless of external circumstances.

What neither his mother nor random reading of books could give him, however, was knowledge of higher mathematics and of theoretical science, for these are rarely acquired without the discipline of formal schooling, or at least of reading under expert direction. For lack of this knowledge, Edison had needless difficulties with many of his experiments but, as with all his difficulties, he simply redoubled his efforts and in the end overcame them.

Having taught him all she knew, Edison’s mother continued as his close confidant and wise counselor in the small business ventures he now began to undertake. His first, at 11, was a fairly profitable market garden where he and a friend raised vegetables which they peddled around town in a hired horse cart. At 12, his working life began in earnest. He took the job of newsboy and candy concessionaire on the daily mixed passenger and freight train leaving Port Huron at 7:00 am for the 3-hour ride to Detroit, where the train lay over until evening, returning to Port Huron at 9:30 pm. It was a long day for a small boy, but he had little choice. On trains people raised their voices, so he could hear them. What other job would have given him this advantage?

As he was paid no wages, Edison’s income depended on his business ingenuity. He made a little extra by carrying a variety of farm products on the train (free of charge) which he sold at way stations. Since his margin of profit on the sale of newspapers was minuscule, it was important that he gauge correctly how many he could sell. Even at that early age he was a clever entrepreneur as is illustrated by the following story:

Having noticed that news of major Civil War battles sold papers like hot cakes, he made it a habit to check with the composing room of the Detroit Free Press for advance information received there by telegraph before ordering his daily supply. He was there the day the news of the Battle of Shiloh came in over the wire and, as he later described it, saw at once that “here was a chance for enormous sales, if only the people along the line could know what happened.” He rushed to the telegraph operator and proposed that a short bulletin be wired by the Detroit train dispatcher to the telegraphers at every station en route to Port Huron, asking them to post news of the battle on their bulletin boards. Then he bought (on credit) five times his normal supply of papers and sold them as “extras” at a greatly increased price per copy. Netting what for him was a fabulous profit. “It was then that it struck me that the telegraph was just about the best thing going,” he wrote later, “for it was the notices on the bulletin boards that had done the trick. I determined at once to become a telegrapher.”

And so he did, though not before he had detoured into successful journalism by purchasing a secondhand press and some type (with part of the Shiloh windfall), writing, editing, and printing a small local paper, the Weekly Herald, which had a circulation of 400 among the railway personnel and sold at 8 cents a copy. Though his grammar and spelling were distinctly individualistic, he had a flair, and might have become a good journalist had his interest not shifted to telegraphy, to the exclusion of all else.

His discovery of telegraphy was a major turning point in Edison’s life, for it provided him with a means of livelihood while he taught himself during his free time how to become an inventor. To his great joy he found that “deafness did not prevent me from hearing the clicking of a telegraph instrument.” He even thought deafness “an advantage to a telegrapher” since it cut out distracting sounds. Every evening he now practiced on an instrument he himself made. He had gone about as far as he could on his own when a Horatio Alger incident gave him the chance to learn the art properly. By quick thinking, he rescued the stationmaster’s child from an oncoming train, whereupon the grateful father offered to give him free instruction.

From age 16 to 22, Edison was a member in good standing of the nomadic tribe of telegraphers. There was then a romantic aura about the telegraph which by 1861 had spanned the continent—8 years before the railroad—and the operators of this mysterious apparatus. For the most part footloose, carefree, young men, well paid but usually out of pocket, they drifted from job to job across the country, heroes in the eyes of most American boys who thought theirs a delightfully adventurous life. For Edison, the adventure soon wore thin under the strain of living a double life— telegrapher at night, experimenter in the daytime, with very little time out for sleep, often going shabby, cold, and hungry to buy needed laboratory materials. His very success increased the tension—all needing to be carefully tested out—he came to begrudge every moment he had to give to the routine job to which he was chained because it alone kept him alive and made it possible to continue experimenting.

But the day finally came when he dared resign his job and set up as an independent inventor. He was 22 then and the going was rough at first. But a year later he sold his first profitable invention (a stock printer) for $40,000, a princely sum in 1870. From then on he was on the road to certain success. Frustrations and reverses were still to come his way in great number but the years when he had often no more than a dollar to his name were definitely over.

The reason for Edison’s success has frequently been asked, and it has never been satisfactorily answered. A “scientific” reply might be that one of the prerequisites of originality is the art of forgetting, at the proper moment, what we know. Without this art the mind remains cluttered with ready-made answers and is not forced to ask the proper questions. For a special type of mind, ignorance in a limited sense gives the advantage of having freedom from certain types of constraint.

To Faraday, his ignorance of mathematics was an asset; Edison benefited from his ignorance of science. As a child, “his demands for explanations of what seemed obvious to his elders created the belief that he was less than normally intelligent. As his head was abnormally large, it was thought that he might have a brain disease.” At a time when his inventions were transforming the pattern of life, his ignorance of scientific theory raised criticism and opposition, especially among highly trained scientists and engineers without inventive talent. He is said to have carried the art of forgetting to such extremes, that on one occasion, when he had to queue at New York City Hall to pay his taxes, and an official suddenly asked him his name, Edison could not at the moment remember it, and lost his place in line.

As with all men who win out in the face of adversity and frustration, Edison himself was frequently asked the “secret” of his success. For people who accomplish little in life, genius is the facile explanation, but Edison would reply that “genius was 99 percent perspiration and one percent inspiration.” This, of course, holds true for everyone.

What we are endowed with at birth is the one percent to which we must add 99 percent in effort, perseverance, and courage if we wish to reach the limits of what it is “possible” for us to achieve. Nor is it likely that by some magic the 99 percent of effort will some day be eliminated; what science and technology will somehow progress to a point where man will be spared the labor of developing himself; or that society as a whole will painlessly do it for him.

We are each and every one of us, as was Edison, the shaper of our own life. This is the lesson his story teaches us.





FIVE: USS GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER[1]





This short biographical sketch was written aboard the USS George Washington Carver during its initial sea trials in May 1966.





George Washington Carver was a botanist and chemurgist[2] renowned in the annals of American scientific agriculture. The child of slaves, he did not know the day of his birth. Even the year is not certain, but he thought it was 1860. Where he was born, however, is not in doubt. In 1943, shortly after he died at Tuskegee Institute, Ala., both Houses of Congress passed, without a dissenting vote, a bill authorizing erection of a national monument at his birthplace in Diamond Grove, Missouri. In fourscore years, George W. Carver had come a long way and accomplished a great deal.

None of it had come easy. His start in life was most inauspicious. A sickly infant, orphaned before he was a year old, it seemed unlikely he would survive. He lost his father in an accident and soon after was kidnapped, together with his mother and sister, by marauding nightriders. Those were lawless times. Stealing slaves for sale to plantations in the Deep South was not uncommon. But George Carver was such a puny baby that the kidnappers had no use for him, and so his master was able to get him released in return for a race horse valued at $300. Of mother and sister nothing was ever heard.

Hard as it was to be a slave child without kith or kin, by great good fortune his master Moses Carver (from whom he took his surname) was not a typical planter but a plain farmer, one of the so-called “Black Republican abolitionist Germans,” or “lop-eared Dutch,” as they were contemptuously called, who had migrated to Missouri in the 1830s. He was opposed to slavery, but he and his wife were childless and middle-aged; they needed help and servants were not to be had. So Moses bought a slave girl from a neighbor for $700. After she had been abducted, he took it upon himself to raise her small son. Slavery ended when the boy was 4 years old but he remained with the Carvers and was treated much as any other farm boy. There was a lot of work to be done and George was expected to do his share. He was an especially apt pupil in all the domestic chores around the house and showed early that he had a way with growing things. People called him “plant doctor” for he could cure any ailing plant; he seemed to know instinctively what it needed in order to grow.

The boy was born with a keen mind, fantastically clever hands and so great a thirst for knowledge that no obstacle could bar him from obtaining an education. Of rebuffs he suffered many, but he was also often given a helping hand. The free school nearby was barred to him, whereupon Mrs. Carver gave him an old blue-back speller and with her help he taught himself to read and write. Thereafter he was hardly ever without a book in his hand. He would prop it up while he washed and ironed, these being some of the chores that earned him a living while he gradually accumulated school credits.

At 10 he decided he must find a school and so he left the Carvers, all his possessions in a small bundle over his shoulder. Thus began an odyssey that was to take him in short stages northward geographically and upward educationally. At several critical times during his 30-year quest for an education, luck or his pleasing personality, or perhaps a combination of both, brought him into contact with warmhearted childless couples who gave him the concern and care usually found only in one’s own family. With a few he stayed but he was never a burden. He earned his keep for he was a prodigious worker, determined never to accept charity.

George Carver literally inched himself up the educational ladder, working his way not just through college but through grade and high school as well, working all the time to support himself. He was 20 before he got to high school, 25 when he graduated. Highland University accepted his credentials but when he presented himself, he was told Negroes were not admitted. He was 30 when he finally entered Simpson College in Iowa. A year later, he entered Iowa State University, graduating with a Bachelor of Science degree in 1894. Invited to become a member of the staff in charge of systematic botany, the bacteriological laboratories and the greenhouse, he continued his studies and received a Master of Science degree in 1896. That year, he was invited by Booker T. Washington to organize and direct a new agriculture department at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. There he remained the rest of his life.

From earliest childhood, Carver had the habit of rising at four and walking about the countryside for an hour or two. Soil, plants and trees interested him intensely; he wanted to know how they were put together, what made them fruitful. Nature was both a consolation and a challenge. In Tuskegee, he found the land exhausted from one-crop cotton culture, robbed of its mineral content, eroded from lack of plant cover, treeless and sun parched. The campus was bare earth, dusty in dry weather; a sea of mud when it rained. He went about looking for ways to restore the overworked earth and found it in green manure and the growing of nitrogenproducing legumes—pod bearers such as vetch, peas, clover, peanuts— plants which enriched the soil. Crop rotation, which European peasants had practiced for a thousand years, had to be relearned by Southern tenant farmers who knew no other crop but cotton. Carver went among them preaching diversification; he urged them to grow peanuts and sweet potatoes. Those who heeded his advice rode out the disastrous invasion of the boll weevil.

On the experimental farm he developed at Tuskegee, he evolved a cross between the short-stalk and the tall-stalk cotton known as “Carver’s Hybrid,” as well as three other new strains. With green manuring, he grew enormous potatoes, cabbages, onions, watermelons and cantaloupes. He instituted a visiting day each month for neighboring farmers to show what could be grown with scientific methods. They were most impressed with his new cotton strain which carried 275 huge bolls on a single bush, and yielded nearly a bale and a quarter per acre, in contrast to the usual one-third of a bale most tenant farmers produced.

To bring the message of scientific agriculture to those who could not come to Tuskegee, Carver loaded a wagon with tools, boxes, jars, and packages of seed and set out every Friday evening after class to give demonstrations to meetings of farmers. In 1906, with money donated by Morris K. Jesup, a member of the Slater Foundation, he designed the socalled Jesup Wagon which served as a movable farmers’ school and was adopted in other countries.

Carver’s skill as soil scientist and plant breeder was to him but a means to help raise the standards of the Southern farmer, not just in productivity, but in his whole way of life. It was obvious to Carver that the prevalent diet of pork, meal and molasses lacked the vitamins and minerals necessary for good health and stamina. So he urged farmers to grow more vegetables and fruits, showed them that many common weeds, properly cooked, were edible and nutritious, taught their women how to prepare them. His own boyhood had been spent on a multipurpose farm where everything the family needed was grown and processed, only sugar and coffee being bought. He called this “living at home” and preached it throughout the land. By avoiding store purchases, a little could be saved each week and eventually a piece of land bought. This, he said, was the way out of poverty. Tenant farmers lived in drab cabins. Noticing the beautifully colored clay in which Alabama abounded, Carver developed a simple method of making color wash and demonstrated how much even the shabbiest cottage could be improved by a paint that cost not a penny.

Carver is best known as a pioneer “chemurgist”—a word, coined by Dr. William J. Hale in 1934, which means chemistry at work. In his book Pioneers of Plenty, Christy Borth called Carver “the first and greatest chemurgist.” Carver made paper from Southern pine “at least a quarter of a century before Dr. Charles H. Herty tackled the problem,” and synthetic marble from wood shavings “years before a rocklike plastic made from wood waste became a chemurgic promise.” He saw promise in the peanut when it was still a lowly weed growing along fences and tolerated by farmers only because their children liked its taste. From the peanut and the sweet potato, Carver developed more than a hundred different products, including plastics, lubricants, dyes, medicines, ink, wood stains, face creams, tapioca and molasses. He developed these in his laboratory at Tuskegee which he had put together out of odds and ends salvaged from scrap heaps.

When he first arrived to take up his post, he discovered there was no money to equip a laboratory. In the course of his life, necessity had made him a genius at making do out of nothing. He and his students made the rounds of the rubbish heaps on campus and in town. They collected bottles, cut their necks off evenly and turned them into beakers. A thick, chipped teacup became a mortar, a piece of pipe the pestle. An old ink bottle with a wick made of string stuck through a cork became a Bunsen burner. Pieces of tin were punched and became sifters. Reeds served as tubes to transfer liquids. Carver had brought with him the one indispensable and costly thing not to be found on scrap heaps: a microscope. It was a parting gift from colleagues at Iowa State.

The products of this laboratory made his name known and brought him tempting offers of positions in industry, and checks for advice that had been sought from him. He politely declined the positions and returned the checks. He had no interest whatsoever in money and could not be bothered with the problem of marketing his inventions. His head was too full of ideas for new products. Advice, he thought, should always be free. He hoped it would reflect favorably on people’s attitude toward his race if he helped others with their problems. His own needs were minimal. Indeed, out of a salary of $1,500 a year at Tuskegee, he saved $33,000 which he donated to the Carver Foundation for reactive research in chemistry.

Many people from all over the world sought out this shy and retiring man, wanting to talk to him and to observe his work. Edison, Henry Ford, Theodore Roosevelt, and other important men became his friends. Honors and honorary degrees came his way. One was the Roosevelt Medal for distinguished service in the field of science (1939). He was introduced to the dinner guests in Theodore Roosevelt’s New York home with these words which are a summing up: “I have the honor to present not a man only, but a life, transfused with passion for the enlarging and enriching of the living of his fellowman.”





PART III: ENGINEERING IN PRACTICE





From 1922, when he was commissioned as an ensign, to 1982, when he retired from active duty as an admiral, Hyman G. Rickover was the quintessential engineer and technical leader. In this section, Admiral Rickover describes his thoughts on the practice of engineering. Like most professionals today, engineers generally work within public or private bureaucracies where there is the possibility (if not a probability) that both what they do and how they work are dictated by the bureaucracy. Thus, doing engineering right within a bureaucracy is the major theme of this section, and possibly the greatest never-ending challenge of engineering.

You will see that the cornerstone of Rickover’s engineering philosophy was the value of responsibility. Instilling the idea that everyone in his organization was personally responsible for the successful performance of the nuclear propulsion plants and for the safety of the sailors operating them created an organizational culture that allowed engineers to act as professionals. High-quality standards, conservatism in design, facing the facts, and technical competence (secondary never-ending challenges of engineering) all become necessary when everyone in an organization (especially its leaders) feels personally responsible for not only their work but for the work of the entire organization.





SIX: THE MEANING OF A PROFESSION: ENGINEERING[1]





This chapter was published in Rickover’s first book, Education and Freedom, which was a collection of his speeches before 1959 on the problems with education in America. Here, Rickover defines what a profession is and the challenges engineers have working professionally within organizations.





To practice a profession one must have acquired mastery of an academic discipline as well as a technique for applying this special knowledge to the problems of everyday life. A profession is therefore intellectual in content, practical in application.

The first definition of the term I could find goes back to the time of the Renaissance when Europe’s universities became in essence training schools for professional men. The Oxford English Dictionary of 1541 says that a profession is “a vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of learning or science is used in its application to the affairs of others.”

Traditionally, professions have been held in esteem because their esoteric content has been impressive; their usefulness patent to everyone; because of all callings they required the longest and most costly period of preparation; and because they were usually practiced by persons of aboveaverage intelligence, education, and character.

Until well into the nineteenth century only members of university faculties and of the three “learned” professions, that is, theology, law, and medicine, were called professional men. But as human knowledge expanded, new fields of learning developed which could be turned to practical use through new professions or through subdivisions of old professions. Engineering is one of the newer professions.

Engineering had been a skilled craft since remote antiquity and necessarily remained a craft as long as no other sources of power except human and animal muscle, wind, and water were known. It developed from a craft into a profession when it acquired a body of systematic knowledge, that is, when scientific advances opened up vast, new sources of energy in nature for the use and convenience of man. Today we have a body of organized knowledge and procedure which requires a lengthy course of professional study in most civilized countries.

The term “profession” today has a well-defined and widely accepted meaning. One might, therefore, expect that no vocation would lay claim to this appellation unless it had in fact become an intellectual pursuit monopolizing some department of higher learning. However, we live in a time of growing equalitarianism in all spheres of life. This has brought about a gradual blurring of the distinction between crafts, trades, and professions. Similarly, indiscriminate granting of diplomas and academic degrees has tended to obliterate the traditional distinction between vocational training and higher education. Many people engaged in useful but nonintellectual or routine activities now call themselves professionals.

For example, you can attend a university and study the new academic discipline of “cosmetology,” obtaining in due course a bachelor’s degree in techniques for beautifying the ladies—God bless them. This is a thoroughly worthy undertaking and I am all for it. But does it become a profession merely because interested parties have endowed a chair in cosmetology?

The traditional hallmark of the professional person, his doctorate, may now be obtained by writing a thesis on a subject such as “Optimum Window Area for a Classroom of Twenty-five Pupils in the Junior High Schools.” A doctoral thesis, you remember, is supposed to climax advanced study in an academic discipline by making a contribution through original research in the subject.

Recently I heard of a university that offers courses in television and radio advertising and in gourmet cookery; now it has added to these pseudoacademic subjects a four-year course in trailer manufacturing, dealership, and trailer-park operations. Upon completion of the trailer course, students are awarded a bachelor’s degree. They may also take postgraduate work in this fascinating field of higher learning and eventually receive a master’s degree, in this way presumably becoming members of a brand-new “learned” profession.

These are examples of what some may consider merely a harmless aberration; one which happens because people like to acquire the symbols of status yet hate to do the hard work which the symbols are supposed to represent. But to my mind it is something more serious. Are we not all extremely indignant, and justly so, when a certain foreign power uses good old words such as “freedom” or “democracy” and twists them around to mean their opposites, thus fooling some people into thinking they are what they are not?

One may even wonder whether institutions that mix salesmanship with science, fly casting with philosophy, and homemaking with history can properly be called “universities”—a term which has a more restrictive meaning, as you will discover if you look it up in Webster’s.

Indiscriminate appropriation of words which traditionally have meant excellence of some sort is stated to be democratic. I myself cannot accept this view. Carried to its logical conclusion, each American baby ought then to be supplied at birth with a combination birth certificate, high-school diploma, B.A. and Ph.D. degree! Actually, we are not consistent in this matter. We do not consider it “undemocratic” to respect and reward excellence in athletics, in art, or in business. It would, therefore, seem only just to reserve the honored word “profession” for vocations maintaining the traditional standards of the well-established “learned” professions.

These standards apply both to the content of a profession and to its practice. The intellectual content of a profession, the field of knowledge it monopolizes, must of course be mastered before a man may begin to call himself a professional person. It is not something learned once and for all in a prescribed course of study. Knowledge increases and a man must keep up with it, so he is never done learning. In fact, he himself is obligated to carry forward the knowledge on which his profession is based and to insure that it is handed down to new members. In a very intimate sense, his own specialty is a professional man’s personal concern and responsibility. The continued advance of a profession can be brought about only by the efforts of its present members who themselves are indebted to the contributions of past members. A professional man who is not able to make original contributions to his field of knowledge can at least work toward enhancing the prestige or standards of his profession. Above all, he can and should support the institutions which train future colleagues.

If professional standards of competence are demanding, so are the standards concerned with professional behavior—with the practicing of a profession. Traditionally, the professional man follows certain tacit or explicit rules of conduct which vary in detail as between different professions. Basic to all of them, however, are two rules: first, the obligation to reject lay direction in the performance of professional work—that is, the duty to maintain professional independence; and second, the obligation to use professional knowledge and techniques solely for the benefit of clients. A clear understanding of these two rules of professional ethics is particularly important for members of the newer professions.

As regards the obligation to maintain professional independence, Flexner—himself an outstanding expert on the nature of professions— remarked: “The essence of . . . professions resides in the application of free, resourceful, unhampered intelligence to the comprehension of problems.”

Service ceases to be professional if it has in any way been dictated by the client or employer. The role of the professional man in society is to lend his special knowledge, his well-trained intellect, and his dispassionate habit of visualizing problems in terms of fundamental principles to whatever specific task is entrusted to him. Professional independence is not a privilege but rather an inner necessity for the professional man, and a safeguard for his employers and the general public. Without it, he negates everything that makes him a professional person and becomes at best a routine technician or hired hand, at worst a hack.

To maintain this freedom, the professional man may have to refuse a lucrative case or relinquish a position with a good salary. In one profession, theology, independence has at times cost the professional his very life. Clergymen of all faiths have shown great courage in resisting the attempts of ruthless governments to dictate to them in matters of religious belief and church administration. These are part of the clergyman’s profession—if I may use the term—in which he cannot brook lay control.

Resistance to lay interference is of course easier when a professional man charges fees than when he works for a salary. For this reason, English barristers are professionally prohibited from becoming salaried employees; they must take each case for a separate fee, even when it is tacitly understood that they will accept all the cases of a particular client. British solicitors are under no such constraint, but then it is the barristers who are the top men in the legal profession and it is from their ranks that English judges are chosen.

Of the various professions which are indispensable in a civilized modern society, that of members of university faculties ranks high in importance. Professors and researchers are salaried professionals: in most European and in some American universities they are paid by the state. The professional independence of these persons has long been recognized as vital to a nation’s intellectual growth. I am speaking, of course, of the principle of academic freedom which is the term applied to the professional freedom of the scholar and the scientist to pursue knowledge wherever it may lead him, even if it leads to conclusions which are politically unpopular. Even so autocratic a country as Prussia understood that without academic freedom her universities would not be able to perform the scientific functions expected of them. Thus we have the strange phenomenon of an express grant of academic freedom in the Prussian constitution of 1850—the only such incidence I have encountered. Sometimes authoritarian governments recognize the inner need of the scholar for this freedom more readily than democracies where egalitarian thinking may consider this to be an unwarranted special privilege.

We have evidence that Russian scholars and scientists are given some academic freedom in strictly limited fields which the government considers politically neutral. Since the Russian people as a whole enjoy no political, economic, or social liberties, even such limited academic freedom apparently suffices to spur the creative abilities of their scientists and engineers. Freedom is a relative thing. The men who push beyond the frontiers of the known are seldom interested in any freedom other than their own driving need. Despite many restrictions, Renaissance scholars, for example, were able to launch a scientific revolution, highly destructive of much that had been implicitly believed for a thousand years and, therefore, bitterly resisted by the authorities. A famous Bolognese philosopher summed up how it was done: “We must speak as the many do, we must think as the few.”

Each new profession must fight to gain this freedom for itself. Unless it wins this fight it will not be a real profession. Engineers must be particularly careful not to lose their recently acquired professional status inadvertently. This may happen when they accept managerial positions. In such positions the engineer-manager often becomes a member of an administrative hierarchy where he must submit to lay superiors. His engineering knowledge then becomes incidental, on a par, let us say, with proficiency in a useful foreign language. He functions as an administrator and is no longer a professional engineer.

Even when he takes a straight engineering position in a corporate or governmental organization he has no guarantee that his professional status will be respected. For the engineer often has more difficulty maintaining professional independence than would a physician employed by the same organization. Yet both are experts in their respective fields—both are professionals. The difference lies in the determination of the medical profession to resist lay interference while the engineering profession does not do this with equal ardor. Towards the physician, the layman is suitably humble in matters medical. Not so, as yet, toward the engineer. This is something for engineers to ponder and to work on, so that eventually their status may become as unquestioned as the doctor’s.

Officials in governmental and corporate complexes wield power commensurate with their rank in the organization. They are accustomed to directing the activities of subordinates and they are convinced that their own rank is clear evidence of their superiority over those with less rank. But professional personnel are in a sense outsiders to the organizational hierarchy. Only rarely do their positions accurately reflect their professional abilities. There is, in truth, no such thing as rank among professionals. Each is “master of his fate”; he stands alone, and by his performance demonstrates his own worth. No organization can give him his true rating.

Professional persons are a rather troublesome anachronism in organizations although they are indispensable in a technological society. An executive honored by high position and impressive emolument will naturally find it extremely hard to admit, even if only to himself, that in certain matters he knows less than a young engineer to whom he pays but a fraction of what he himself earns. Such dispassionate assessment of one’s own limitations is rare and calls for large-mindedness and imagination; for humility in the face of the vast powers with which modern technology deals; for a great deal more understanding of science than is possessed by most laymen.

Perhaps the present scarcity of outstanding engineers and the keen competition for their services by government, industry, and the universities may firm up the status of the profession.

A frank and perceptive editorial in a recent Dupont publication, entitled “The Great Talent Search,” remarks wryly that in competing for qualified professional men, business is handicapped since the only incentive it had to offer is money whereas professional and academic life provide many intangible incentives. It is but a short step from recognition by business that there are other than monetary incentives to the realization that it, too, can provide such incentives.

American businessmen are noted for their ingenuity. They could, I am sure, educate their management people to understand that it is not good business to pay for professional services and then downgrade all one’s bright young men to the level of routine technicians. In this connection it is gratifying to observe the growing practice in industry of engaging engineers to direct engineering projects.

Today most engineering is done in association with colleagues on joint projects. Supervision of such groups of engineers by a fellow engineer is professionally indispensable. As long as the man who calls the shots is a colleague, teamwork does not infringe on professional status. This sort of working together is practiced in other professions besides engineering. During surgical operations, for example, one man must be boss and the rest carry out his orders. You can see what I am driving at if you try to visualize a surgical team working under a lay hospital administrator! Eventually I hope that the absurdity of putting an engineering team under a lay administrator will become equally obvious to those who run our huge corporate and government complexes. It’s like setting a blind man to lead the seeing.

Creating conditions which will attract engineers and stimulate their productivity is important. But productivity is not the sole consideration; safety is even more important. There is a great need for awareness in management of the nature of the forces which science and engineering are now harnessing for the benefit of mankind. These forces are far too complex and too hazardous to be manipulated by technological amateurs.

Long ago a Greek physician sighed: “The life so short, the art so long to learn!” I commend this sentiment to all who supervise complex scientific and engineering projects without themselves possessing professional competence in these matters. It takes a long time and hard study to become a scientist or an engineer. How, then, can even the ablest executive expect to know and understand the details of technical work? Native wit, talent for leadership, even experience in running large organizations—none of these valuable qualities are substitutes for “the art so long to learn.”

Perhaps as a people we lack respect for the laws of nature and hence for those who know most about these laws. In popular esteem, the manipulator of men outranks the manipulator of abstract laws and facts, and so we tend to overpay the administrator and underpay the creative professional man. We then compound this error by evaluating the worth of a man’s advice by the size of his salary. This lopsided scale of values can stand readjustment. Insistence on professional independence for scientists and engineers may eventually bring this about.

Of course the professional person’s legitimate refusal to accept lay control over the manner in which he performs his tasks cannot be twisted into an excuse for incompetence or for blunder. To use the example of an operation again: the surgeon obviously cannot allow the patient’s relatives to lean over his shoulder and point out to him where and how he is to make his incision. He must be completely independent of lay direction in the performance of the operation. However, the surgeon will most certainly be judged by the results of the operation. If too many of his patients die, the public will render judgment on him and he will soon have much spare time on his hands.

This distinction between dictation of method and judgment of results is not always clearly understood, particularly in callings which are still in the process of developing into professions but have not yet achieved this status. At this stage the prerogatives of professional status may loom larger than they actually are—they may even be visualized as a sort of divine right to escape all public censure for error or failure because of the layman’s alleged inability to judge professional work. This would be a nice setup if it could be put across to the public, but I am afraid people won’t accept it.

In dealings with professional men, the ordinary person is of course always at a disadvantage since in professional knowledge he cannot match wits with an expert. He cannot even judge whether a person calling himself a professional is truly an expert in his field. To safeguard the laymen against being victimized by quacks and, incidentally, to protect legitimate professionals against competition from unscrupulous impostors, the state usually restricts the right to practice by requiring a license and granting this only upon evidence of proper professional training. Professional associations have gone still further in their efforts to guarantee good service and protect the good name of their members by setting up codes of professional ethics.

This practice varies from country to country, depending on the degree of social importance ascribed by the public to any given profession. Thus in continental Europe the title “engineer” is commonly restricted to persons who have proved their competence to the authorities; in Anglo-Saxon countries it is not so restricted. The professional person’s standing in the community depends, in final analysis, on the public’s insight into his work, that is, on the educational level of the man in the street. When the specialized knowledge of professional people is incomprehensible to him, the average man is apt to flounder between frustrated suspicion and excessive awe, leading him either to interfere unduly with professional independence or to accept naively every claim made by anyone who calls himself a professional. The relation between the expert and the public is one of the central problems of our day.

This problem has been aggravated by a spectacular accumulation of specialized knowledge in the last four centuries. Since rediscovery of classical thought in the Renaissance, knowledge has been increasing rapidly. In part, this has been a result of the liberation of man’s intellect. This has come about through acceptance of Greek intellectual techniques and eventual expansion of these techniques into our modern scientific method. In part, it has come about as a result of an enormous expansion of population in the last four hundred years, particularly among people of Western civilization who increased almost twice as fast as the world as a whole. Since the people of the West also outdistance all others in scientific productivity, the sum of human knowledge has grown phenomenally. It now doubles every fifteen years according to available estimates. In contrast, the doubling of population, even in such fast-growing countries as the United States, takes forty years at today’s rate of increase. The outpourings of this intellectual horn of plenty are overwhelming. No longer can anyone “take all knowledge as his province.”

Unfortunately, the average person is touched only obliquely by most of this new knowledge, as when he benefits from some new commodity or service which has grown out of an addition to scientific knowledge. He usually accepts these new things as just another gift from his fairy godmother, Science, and he gives little thought to the manner in which they have been brought about: the long chain of arduous effort which began in a remote laboratory where the germinal idea originated; the long process of applied research to verify its practicability; the detailed engineering to transform it into something useful; and the final step taken by industry and commerce to make it available to the consumer.

While the practical results of increased knowledge merge into our way of life, the knowledge itself seldom becomes part of our general culture. It remains the possession of small groups of experts, each owning that part which pertains to his specialty. This is so not because the experts are selfishly keeping knowledge to themselves, but because most people simply have no taste for knowledge and do not want to spare the time for learning about this potent force in their lives. The gap widens between the experts and the people who depend for their well-being on the work of these experts. This disturbing cleavage exists in the humanities no less than in the sciences. Most people are not well informed in such vital matters as the languages and cultures of the various peoples who share this earth with us; the historic, geographic, and economic background of current events; the place of American civilization in the estimation of the world; and the real strength of our country in the shifting sands of power relations.

The director of the President’s Council on Youth Fitness, speaking of the need to improve the physical fitness of our youth, aptly described us as a people addicted to “spectatoritis.” We have both physical and mental spectatoritis. We sit in the bleachers and let the game of life unfold before us. We accept the delightful rabbits which science keeps pulling out of its magician’s hat without bothering to investigate how it is done. We accept our country’s power and strength without worrying too much whether as citizens we are always conducting ourselves as the world expects the people of a great nation to act. We gladly accept all the benefits America has to give us but leave to others the responsibilities that go with them. We measure our own personal worth by the number and quality of material possessions we are able to buy, not by what we make of the God-given capabilities with which we were born.

This passive acceptance of life’s benefits and unconcern for the great problems of our day could undermine our freedom subtly and almost imperceptibly. As citizens of a democracy, we are all rulers of this country, and rulers cannot afford to be ignorant of everything beyond the narrow confines of their own small personal world. This was well understood by the upper and middle classes of past societies who knew that their rule depended upon comprehension of the world in which they lived. It was the reason why they made certain that their sons were broadly educated. Intelligence is not the special preserve of any particular class. Learning is hard for everyone. If the middle class of old were able to push most of their sons through tough schools and universities where they received the liberal education which fits men for leadership, this was not because their sons had superior intellectual capacities but because they were strongly motivated, determined to improve their inherent abilities by training mind and body to their utmost. This motivation came from home and school environments which fostered respect for excellence and emphasized the need of competence in whatever position one occupied in the world. Determination can offset average endowments, but without the desire to improve oneself, the highest native capacities count for little.

Today most Americans have more leisure than the middle and upper classes had in the past. Our country is rich enough to provide the same tough education for all our children which once only middle-class parents required of their sons. But neither our leisure nor the obvious fact that democratic citizens must know a great deal more about their world today than was necessary in a simpler past—neither of these excellent reasons for giving every child a thorough education has greatly influenced popular ideas about education. We have adopted middle-class standards widely in our manners, our homes, our taste in clothes; in all the externals of life. We have not as yet adopted traditional middle-class standards in regard to education. In fact, Americans were more ambitious to better themselves through improving their minds when we were all poorer; when self-improvement meant going to night school after a long day’s hard work. The desire for an education which will really stretch our minds is not yet dead but it is almost smothered by our soft and pleasant life. No longer is our national goal a life of adventure, of risk, of a chance to reach for the stars; instead, it has become a desire for comfort and security.

The price to be paid for comfort and security is too high when it results in ignorance of the powerful forces which control our destiny. Science is now able to change our environment in ways which no one had ever dreamed of. It is disturbing to watch the relentlessly widening gulf separating the minority who understand and make use of science from the uninformed majority who passively accept whatever comes to them from the hands of the experts. That this gulf has not led to conflict or deep alienation—at least not yet—is owing to two phenomena unique to Western civilization: political democracy and professional ethics.

Political democracy vests ultimate power in the average citizen, regardless of his intelligence, education, or sense of responsibilities; and professional ethics forbids professional men to take unwarranted advantage of their own superior knowledge. Both of these safeguards we owe to the Greeks. Both were evolved by the Greeks in response to a situation then prevailing where knowledge was concentrated in the collective minds of small groups of experts and spread thinly over the mass of the people. The gap which then existed, say, between the learned men in Egypt who knew how to predict the annual flood of the Nile and the peasant who planted his field in accordance with their prediction—this gap was not much wider than the one between Von Neumann’s knowledge of mathematics and that of the average American.

At the dawn of Western civilization the general pattern of life in settled communities was one in which a small group, versed in esoteric knowledge, ruled over the rest of the people to whom access to such knowledge was denied. The legends of many peoples reflect the propaganda of the elite that aspiration to knowledge above one’s own station was sinful and would call down the wrath of the gods. Practical knowledge of the kind needed by the peasant, the artisan, the shopkeeper—yes, these the masses might learn. But knowledge of law, medicine, theology, astronomy, the ability to read and write, and to govern, these were a sort of magic possessed only by the divinely ordained few.

Guarded jealously and handed down only within the group, this knowledge provided its possessors with power, wealth, and comfort. In some parts of the world one can even today find people enslaved to experts who use their special knowledge to enforce subordination to their will—shamans, medicine men, and the like.

The Greeks were the first to put the expert in his place. They tore away his mantle of mystery; they denied that knowledge was a special dispensation reserved by the gods for particular groups of people. They threw open the door to knowledge and made its acquisition the supreme civic and human virtue. They looked upon the universe and man’s relation to it as a proper object of study for all men. They believed that everything could be understood by the right kind of intellectual technique. To know, man first had to observe, then to collect and organize his observations; finally to discover what were the underlying, the basic principles in the mass of information on hand. Hard thinking was necessary, but it brought its reward; for once known, these principles could then automatically be applied to new problems. The result might be described as an intellectual chain reaction. It goes far to explain the amazing accomplishments of the ancient Greeks.

Their approach to learning was secular and intellectual; it was rigorous in its insistence on logical deduction from verifiable facts. All that was needed to transform this intellectual technique into our modern scientific method was addition of “controlled” experiments and the necessary instruments to do this. Experiments merely widen the sphere of human observation; they permit pinpointing inquiry on specific objects and they bolster deduction through verification by controlled tests. Without laboratories and accurate scientific tools the Greeks were able to create sciences out of conglomerations of unrelated bits of knowledge which had long been possessed by many other peoples. Thus they founded a science of mathematics, of astronomy, of medicine, of history. They gave the West a scientific habit of mind.

Having thought their way out of the then universally prevalent habit of confusing knowledge with divinely sanctioned magic, the Greeks were bound to reject any claim by experts that their special knowledge justified a privileged position. In the political field, this meant rejection of the claim that certain persons had a divine right to be rulers, and so the Greeks were the first civilized people to establish popular rule. Their type of democracy was based on the belief that average Athenians, for example, were quite capable of governing themselves, not only as legislators but even as government officials. Greek democracy required direct participation in government by all adult males. Each was a member of the Assembly and took turns serving his city as soldier, magistrate, judge, and priest. The smallness of the Greek city-state simplified the art of governing, and the absence of a priestly caste in Greek religion permitted lay performance of religious functions.

But this would not have been feasible without a relatively high level of education, and indeed the Greeks were a literate people. Free access to knowledge was the basis of their way of life which differed so radically from that of the people surrounding them—people who were everywhere enslaved by their own ignorance of any except purely practical knowledge. Though a Greek city-state such as Athens did not provide free schooling, the obligation of parents to provide for their son’s education was well understood and accepted. Solon is credited with having hit on a clever device to give sanction to this moral obligation. He released sons from the filial duty to take care of their fathers in old age, if the fathers had not made provision for their son’s education!

Athens in 400 B.C. appears to have had fewer illiterates than many “advanced” nations in A.D. 1800. Moreover, almost anybody could broaden his mind by attending the theater which in Athens had distinctly educational aims besides that of entertainment. “Recreation for the spirit” was available in abundance; one could listen to the philosophers as they wandered about with their pupils, discoursing learnedly and wittily on practically every question or problem known to preindustrial man, and in this pleasant manner one could absorb ideas about truth and beauty which have inspired men ever since. Athens was permeated by a love of learning which most of us would consider excessive. There were eggheads galore and oddly enough the Athenians respected them. They even put up with a man such as Democritus when he uttered the following “weird” sentiment: “I would rather discover one scientific fact than be King of Persia.”

Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of Greek democracy was that it did not lead to a cult of mediocrity. On the contrary, education of the young was designed to bring all their faculties to fruition—the suppleness and beauty of their bodies through athletic games, the perceptivity and sharpness of their minds through dialectics, what we would call “public speaking.” As Pericles expressed the Athenian ideal, government is in the hands of the people, the law secures equal justice for all, and “as for social standing, our practice is that a citizen who has recognized ability in some field gets public preferment—it is a question of his abilities, not of his rank.”

To deprecate the value of classical civilization for modern man is the fashion, but I myself am constantly struck with the lasting validity of so much of what the Greeks and Romans thought and wrote. These thoughts are the basis of many of our most treasured traditions and institutions. Greek political ideas greatly influenced the founding fathers and helped them to devise for us a most marvelous constitutional framework. The Greeks paved the way for modern science, while the Romans still influence the law under which all the people of the West live to this day (even in common-law countries). It is not too fanciful to consider our modern engineering colleges remote descendants of the Greek medical school at Kos or the Roman legal school at Beirut, or even Plato’s Academy and Aristotle’s Lyceum in Athens.

It is true that Greek and Roman civilizations were based on slavery and that some of their habits and practices were rather odd. Much is made of this by anticlassicist “progressives.” And it is also true that outwardly a modern technological society seems to have little in common with Rome and still less with the tiny preindustrial Greek city-state. Yet human problems have a way of persisting unchanged through the most revolutionary permutations of man’s environment. The product of clear, logical thought has permanent value. It is, as Thucydides put it, a “possession forever.”

Nowhere is this more clearly evident than in the continuing validity of Greek thought about the role of the expert—the professional man—in society. The Greeks evolved the concept that, far from entitling him to a position of power, as everywhere else in the ancient world, the possession of specialized professional knowledge actually imposes on the expert a special obligation, namely to use this knowledge solely for the good of others. This concept is, of course, basic to the position of the professional man in Western civilization. It is foreign to most other civilizations, except where they have deliberately adopted it from the West.

The Greeks founded the first true profession and the science which belongs to it—medicine. They formulated the professional ethics of this profession in the famed Oath of Hippocrates which we have not been able to improve upon. Young doctors embarking on their careers still swear this oath. Its fundamental creed of obligation and responsibility is basic to all subsequent professional codes. All are adaptations of what the Greeks originated.

In this country we have gone far toward cutting ourselves off from the broad stream of Western culture. Rome and Athens are not for our children. Ancient history is supposed to bore them. So they are taught the essence of democracy by joining “smoke-abatement campaigns”; they are shown the utility of simple arithmetic by paying a visit to City Hall to watch the clerks at work. As for learning the languages of the founders of Western civilization, Heaven forbid! Far more useful is it to teach our youth how to drive an automobile and take its motor apart.

I am going to fly in the face of the opinions of all sorts of self-appointed experts on the needs of modern man by suggesting that familiarity with classical thought not only enriches life but is distinctly useful to any professional man. And as a guide to engineering ethics I should like to commend a liberal adaptation of the injunction contained in the Oath of Hippocrates that the professional man do nothing that will harm his client. Since engineering is a profession that affects the material basis of everyone’s life, there is almost always an unconsulted third party involved in any contract between the engineer and those who employ him—and that is the country, the people as a whole. These, too, are the engineer’s clients, albeit involuntarily. Engineering ethics ought, therefore, to safeguard their interests most carefully. Knowing more than the public about the effects his work will have, the engineer ought to consider himself an “officer of the court” and keep the general interest always in mind.

Since the engineer deals with metals and fuels of which the earth has but a limited supply, it will make a great difference to future generations whether or not he is fully conscious that every ounce of metal or fossil fuel he uses means a diminution of our national patrimony which we bequeath to our descendants.

Engineers build structures which alter man’s supply of pure air and water, of food and soil. A poorly designed factory may poison air and water; a dam or highway may needlessly rob our grandchildren of good farm land which by then may well be in short supply. Almost everything the engineer does has an effect on our materials base. His work is seldom purely an engineering task, though he sometimes acts as if it were.

For example, not long ago a bridge was being built across a body of sea water containing valuable oyster beds. A small change of location would have saved the oysters. When this was pointed out by a marine biologist, the engineer in charge of building the bridge rejected the advice out of hand with the contemptuous remark: “What do you know about building bridges?” An irrelevant and rude reply. More to the point would have been to ask the engineer: “What do you know about building bridges in the particular locality?” In this instance the livelihood of a number of people, not in any way involved with the bridge or with hiring the engineer, was adversely affected.

To give another example I am familiar with: the design and operation of nuclear power plants. These involve questions of public health and safety which go far beyond those encountered in conventional power plants. For this reason we use every conceivable talent that can help in the design. And when the design is completed, it is gone over in detail by a committee composed of outstanding specialists in many technical areas. These men who are full-time professionals in their respective fields advise the Atomic Energy Commission on the safety of proposed reactor plants. Since reactor safety is a broad problem requiring knowledge of many subjects, the members of this committee are selected not only for their knowledge of reactors but for their demonstrated competence in relevant areas such as meteorology, oceanography, nuclear physics, mechanical, electrical, and chemical engineering, sanitary engineering, design of pressure vessels, explosives, industrial insurance, and so on.

Consultation with other experts ought to become as common in engineering as it is in medicine. An early Venetian medical code (about A.D. 1500) made it mandatory for a physician to consult a colleague before he prognosed any serious disease. Yet medical mistakes affect only one person, the patient; engineering mistakes can affect multitudes.

Within the lifetime of all adults a profound change has taken place in this country which has gone almost unnoticed by most Americans but which must strike any engineer forcibly. It is that we have ceased being one of the world’s richest countries in mineral and fuel resources and a great exporter of raw materials. Indeed, we now depend on imports for many vitally needed materials. As I see it, the most important aspect of the engineer’s code of professional ethics ought to be the obligation to do nothing that will unnecessarily aggravate future resource deficiencies. To my mind his greatest task is to do everything he can to preserve opportunities for a good life to coming generations who will not be so rich in land and resources as we are today. This means, in particular, no needless waste of irreplaceable materials; no permanent destruction of good soil or of our shrinking water resources merely for the sake of immediate advantages; it means utmost ingenuity in substituting abundant materials for scarce materials, renewable resources for irreplaceable resources. For example, in our nuclear propulsion program we are currently working to eliminate the use for testing purposes of a scarce gas, helium, by substituting a more abundant gas. When one is alert to the problem, many ways to save our resources capital will suggest themselves.

Greatly improved education for all and ingenious use of technology will help to offset diminishing land, mineral, and fuel resources. We have only to look at Europe to see what can be done. There a fairly high standard of living is being maintained on a modest resources base.

Switzerland, for example, has only one fifth as much land per capita as we have, yet she manages to produce a per-capita gross national product more than half ours, and only one third less than that of rich and empty Canada. Or, to put it another way, Switzerland has more than twice the population density of India, and she has only rocks, water and scenery, while India has rich natural resources. Yet the individual Swiss citizen is seventeen times as wealthy as the individual Indian. Improved technology brought about by educational investment in people is the secret of Switzerland’s productivity and high standard of living. And technology is the engineer’s métier. His is potentially the most important profession because the future well-being of all people may well depend on the manner in which he practices it.

I can think of no better way to raise engineering to the highest professional level than by practicing it in such a manner that every side effect is carefully considered and nothing is done which might conceivably damage fellow citizens, especially those as yet unborn. In fact, I should like to see an engineering oath expressing this sense of responsibility. It might well be something like the ephebic oath sworn by all young Athenians when, at the end of two years of preparation and service, they become full citizens. Each of these young men—called ephebi—promised solemnly to leave his city “not less but better than he found it.”

A promise to leave his country not less but better than he found it would be a most appropriate beginning for an engineering career.





SEVEN: THE NEVER-ENDING CHALLENGE[1]





This chapter was originally given as the keynote speech at the National Metal Congress on October 29, 1962, in New York City. The National Metal Congress was a metallurgical conference sponsored by the American Society of Metals—now ASM International. The audience was industrially minded engineers and technical managers whose work was related to the manufacturing and performance of metals and components made of metals—mainly steel in the early 1960s. This call to arms for quality control proved to be a premonition when the USS Thresher went down on April 9, 1963, with all hands lost, apparently as a result of the poor quality of brazes in the saltwater system—a system outside of Rickover’s responsibilities.





Progress—like freedom—is desired by nearly all men, but not all understand that both come at a cost. Whenever society advances—be it in culture and education or science and technology—there is a rise in the requirements man must meet to function successfully. The price of progress is acceptance of these more exacting standards of performance and relinquishment of familiar habits and conventions rendered obsolete because they no longer meet the new standards. To move but one rung up the ladder of civilization man must surpass himself. The simple life comes “naturally,” the civilized life compels effort.

In any advancing society some elements will accept the advantages of life at a higher plateau yet ignore its obligations. This is readily seen when backward people seek to modernize their society. Sociologists call it a “culture lag.” Something akin to culture lag exists even in highly developed countries such as the United States. And, because all parts of a modern society are interdependent, failure to meet rising standards in any sector becomes a brake on general progress and harms society as a whole.

I need not spell out to this audience that we have no choice but to keep in the forefront of civilization. Progress today is the sine qua non of national survival. It is the paramount national interest. Since our country is a selfgoverning democracy, this paramount national interest is in the safekeeping of each and every one of us. If we do not look after the national interest, no one else will. That is what self-government means. In this instance, moreover, civic duty is strongly reinforced by private interest. Were the nation to falter in its forward movement, we should all suffer dire consequences in our most private lives. The nation’s paramount interest coincides with every citizen’s paramount self-interest.

It follows that the existence of a “culture lag” in any important sector of our society is the legitimate concern of every citizen. Insofar as special competencies allow us to do so, we each have a right and a duty to call attention to factors seriously impeding progress, and to suggest ways and means for overcoming these obstacles. I submit that in my own field of reactor technology we have a culture lag in that many involved with this new technology fail to recognize that to exploit the power locked in the atom we must rise to a higher technological plateau. And that consequently a more exacting standard must be met in everything pertaining to this new source of power. Failure to understand this reduces the benefit the nation obtains from nuclear power.

Take the ways we make use of our nuclear power potential or how we operate nuclear power plants. If this is to be done wisely persons in authority must possess an unusually high degree of general and technical knowledge and competence. Unfortunately, decisions affecting this field are sometimes made by people who have little knowledge of nuclear engineering and of science. There is a danger this may lead to errors highly damaging to the position of the United States or to the health and safety of the American people.

Thus, when persons who are authorized to deal with nuclear power as an instrument of national policy are technically ignorant, they may incorrectly appraise its importance. They may underrate the value to our nation of the near monopoly we currently enjoy in reactor technology and in consequence fail to guard this asset with sufficient care. Again, when persons who are authorized to administer nuclear power plants are technically ignorant, they may underestimate the hazards and, in consequence, fail to understand that nuclear power plants cannot be operated safely except by highly competent and rigorously trained men. Reserving this task to persons so qualified may run counter to traditional personnel policies based on equalizing career opportunities. Administrators unfamiliar with nuclear science and engineering frequently resist change in established practices. They do this because they have little conception of the potential danger to large numbers of people if nuclear power plants are handled ineptly. If they understand the dangers of radiation they would realize that safety must take precedence over their otherwise laudable desire to give everyone a chance at running a nuclear plant.

As I have said, some elements of society will accept the advantages of life at a higher plateau, yet ignore its obligations.

My remarks today concern the harmful results caused by failure of American industry to live up to the exacting standards of reactor technology. We depend on private industry to supply the materials and equipments for our nuclear power plants. Current industrial practices are, on the whole, not geared to the standards imposed by this new technology.

While it has not been too difficult to focus management attention on the nuclear reactor itself, which represents a novel development, it has been extremely difficult to get management to give effective attention to the conventional components of these plants. Routine manufacturing and engineering practices continue to be followed, even though experience has shown these practices to be inadequate.

Successful operation of a nuclear power plant depends on the reliability of all its parts, the reactor as well as the conventional components—the heat exchangers, pressure vessels, valves, turbo-generators, etc. Although these are all designed and manufactured by long established procedures and so should present no special difficulty, delivery and performances of these conventional items have been less reliable than those of the nuclear reactors themselves. Senior people in the Naval Reactors Group must therefore devote much of their time solving ever-recurring problems in the design, materials and workmanship of conventional components.

Compared with the complexity of nuclear engineering itself these problems individually are minor in nature, yet they occur so frequently as to require a disproportionate amount of our time. If we are to build successful nuclear power plants at reasonable cost and in reasonable time, the whole plateau of industrial workmanship, engineering inspection, and quality control must be raised well above the present level. This is the responsibility of management. Management’s technical function, after all, is to see to it that production meets the customer’s requirements.

We are altogether too prone in this country to expect magical breakthroughs and short-cuts through science and engineering. We naively expect that the mere expenditure of large sums of money by government will rapidly and automatically solve our technical problems and assure continued growth of our technology. We place too much emphasis on streamlined techniques such as computer programmed management, instead of realizing that present technical problems are less a matter of generating new ideas than of carrying them out in a straightforward, methodical and painstaking manner. Only in this way can the new scientific advances be turned to practical use. There is no substitute for constant personal supervision of production work by management. The higher we advance technically, the more important becomes the personal attention of the manager, the less can he rely on merely issuing orders.

Too often management is satisfied to sit in plush offices, far removed physically and mentally from the design and manufacturing areas, relying on paper reports for information about the status of design and production in the plant itself—the real center of the enterprise. This lack of firsthand evaluation results in poorly designed and manufactured equipment, late delivery, or both. During the past few years, hundreds of major conventional components, such as pressure vessels and steam generators, have been procured for naval nuclear propulsion plants. Less than ten percent have been delivered on time. Thirty percent were delivered six months to a year or more later than promised. Even so, reinspection of these components after delivery showed that over 50 percent of them had to be further reworked in order to meet contract specifications requirements.

We have tried to improve matters by sending representatives of the Naval Reactors Group to manufacturers’ plants to make on-the-spot checks of engineering and production progress. Often our men discover extremely unsatisfactory conditions of which management was unaware. The usual management reaction is to disbelieve the facts submitted to them. Corrective action is therefore often taken too late. The most prevalent inadequacy found in our audits is failure to recognize that timely production of high quality components requires almost infinite capacity for painstaking care and attention to detail by all elements of the organization, both management and non-management; this is as true for a so-called conventional “old-line” product as for a new one.

Fortunately, some companies are forward looking and receptive to new ideas and try out our suggestions. For example, one company agreed to move the offices of the executive and supervisory personnel to the plant manufacturing areas. I would like to quote from a letter I received recently from that company:

“While we expected to obtain significant benefits from this move, the actual results achieved to date have been far beyond our expectations. As a result of this move, communications have been greatly improved among all levels of supervisory personnel and issues can be resolved face-to-face with shop personnel in an expeditious manner. We now have considerably less internal memoranda and telephone calls, and we have actually reduced the size of our secretarial staff. The fact that management personnel now have the opportunity to observe from their office windows most of our manufacturing areas has improved the attention being given to work by operating personnel. Further, the close proximity between engineering and operating personnel has improved relationships and understanding of problems at all levels in the company; this has resulted in improved quality, better cost control and shorter fabrication time.”

Failure of management to meet the standards required by advancing technology reduces the benefit our nation obtains from huge investments in research and development. Of an annual total of about $16 billion, nearly $12 billion come out of the taxpayer’s pocket. The size of these expenditures places a great responsibility on industry. It must get people into management who have the competence to make certain that stockholders and taxpayers receive full value for the money invested in new technology, and that the nation’s technical resources are effectively used. Yet, time and again I have found that management is reluctant to depart from outdated practices; that it is not informed of what is actually going on in the plant; that it fails to provide the informed and strong leadership necessary to bring about improvements in engineering and production. It is not well enough understood that conventional components of advanced systems must necessarily meet higher standards. Yet it should be obvious that failures that would be trivial if they occurred in a conventional application will have serious consequences in a nuclear plant because here radioactivity is involved. Even in the non-nuclear parts of our plants we must have full reliability if the great endurance of nuclear power is to be realized.

Management has a responsibility not only for successful engineering and production in its own plant; it also has a responsibility for accuracy of the data it supplies. These data are often used by other organizations when they design components. I recall one case where the elevated temperature mechanical strength properties of a common material, as given by the manufacturer and used in the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, were found on test to be 30 percent too high. Checking this we discovered that the mechanical properties data presented as being firm were based on a limited test that had been conducted ten years previously and on but one heat of material which had been given but a single fabrication heat treatment. We often found it necessary to run our own tests to determine the true physical properties of many conventional materials under varying conditions. And this, despite the fact that these materials have been in widespread industrial use for over 30 years. This experience does not speak well of management or of the effectiveness of technical societies in seeing to it that correct technical data are available and that salesmanship does not overshadow technical excellence.

I should like to discuss two areas that are in need of continuous and painstaking attention to detail by management, by engineers, and by workmen. These are:

First. Incomplete understanding of basic manufacturing and inspection processes, and

Second. Poor workmanship and poor quality control. Let me give you specific examples.

1. Incomplete Understanding of Basic Manufacturing and Inspection Processes.

When we design components for nuclear power plants we make every effort to utilize existing processes. At first we assumed basic processes that have been in widespread industrial use for many years would be well understood. Our experience showed this was not so. I will describe some of the types of difficulties we constantly encounter. They have to do with faulty welding, faulty radiography and defective castings; that is, with deficiencies in basic conventional processes of present-day technology.

The press frequently reports malfunctions of advanced components or systems caused by failure of a weld, improper use of a routine process, or use of defective materials. Industry apparently considers such failures to be inevitable, since not enough is being done to correct the causes. The Naval Reactors and Shippingport Atomic Power Station programs have had their full share of these problems.

There are 99 carbon steel welds in one particular nuclear plant system. The manufacturer stated that all these welds were radiographed and met specification. Our own re-evaluation of these welds—using correct procedures and proper X-ray sensitivity—showed however that only ten percent met ASME standards; 35 percent had defects definitely in excess of ASME standards and the remaining 55 percent had such a rough external surface that the radiographs obtained could not be interpreted with any degree of assurance. We found this condition of unsatisfactory welds and improper radiography to be quite prevalent in many segments of industry. When we insisted that manufacturers meet the standards which had been established for many years as being necessary, very high rejection rates for welds resulted. One manufacturer, over a three month period, had to reject 47 percent of all carbon steel welds made in his shop; his rejection rates for welds made in the field, where conditions were less favorable, was even higher. In other types of welds a manufacturer had 85 to 100 percent rejection rates. I would like to emphasize that this unsatisfactory welding situation came to light only because we demanded that manufacturers prove to us they were meeting the standards which they themselves had accepted in the contract.

While many of these unsatisfactory welds might be attributed to poor workmanship, the underlying cause was management’s failure to enforce standards. As a result there has been insufficient incentive to develop new processes and materials that would consistently produce acceptable welds. The blame for allowing this condition to exist rests squarely with the technical societies responsible for establishing standards, and with purchasers of equipment who do not insist that these standards are met.

We need to know a great deal more about welding. Take the case of unexplained variation in welding ability from one heat of stainless steel to another. Although stainless steel was developed 50 years ago and has been applied extensively through the world, I am constantly amazed how little is actually known about this material. Recently we encountered difficulties in welding stainless steel forgings for valve bodies; previously there had been no problems with these forgings. Investigating this we found that early this year the forging manufacturer had made what he considered a minor change in the composition of the material to improve its forgeability. His technical people failed to consider that this small change might cause the material to respond differently in subsequent manufacturing operations. Moreover, they did not even bother to test a sample forging of the slightly modified material to determine its acceptability. As a result, we now have more than 100 stainless steel forgings which may have to be scrapped.

Casting is another basic process that is not fully understood. We often have to order two or three times as many castings as we need, because we have so much trouble obtaining satisfactory ones. Otherwise we may not have enough acceptable castings on time. Here is an example of the kind of difficulties we encounter: two low alloy steel castings, 2.5 feet in diameter and 8 feet in length, were ordered. The castings were of a simple cylindrical shape and conventional in design. The manufacturer promised a firm delivery date. The first two castings, however, had to be scrapped because of internal defects. The manufacturer then made three more castings; these also were unsatisfactory. Because of this experience it became necessary to switch to forgings in lieu of castings. Meanwhile delivery of the equipment has been greatly delayed. The case is typical of failure to understand technical casting problems. Had we, at the start, fully realized how little the manufacturer actually knew about producing good castings, we could have ordered backup materials and prevented the long delay.

There have been casting problems with other common materials as well: For instance, we have been unable to obtain certain large valve castings. When we do receive acceptable castings, this is only after 200 to 300 weld repairs have been made on each casting. Although this sort of difficulty has existed for many years, industry has not yet developed adequate techniques for successfully producing large castings.

Radiography is another basic process of contemporary conventional technology where we are constantly troubled with problems. Extensive use of radiography for over 30 years led us to believe that this nondestructive testing technique for determining soundness of welds and castings was well understood, and that the sensitivity requirements of existing ASME and Navy specifications were being met. We found this definitely not to be so. For years many of these requirements have been consistently violated.

In consequence, large numbers of radiographs were of little or no value for determining integrity of welds and castings. There are several reasons for this state of affairs, some of which have wider implications. These include:

A general feeling or opinion that ASME and Navy specifications requirements are a desirable goal rather than a firm requirement.This has brought about deterioration of quality under pressure of production schedules and cost reduction drives.

Frequent lack of understanding as to what the specification requirements actually are and why it is important that they be met.

The personal opinion of an individual in the manufacturer’s organization that a particular part of the specification is not necessary. In consequence no attempt is even made to meet the requirement, but the customer is not informed of this.

In some instances it was impracticable to conform to a particular specification requirement. We should have been advised that the requirement was impracticable. Instead, an individual would take it upon himself to waive the requirement without notifying his company or us.

A belief that radiography is such a highly specialized technology that persons outside this field are not capable of contributing to its interpretation or improvement. Actually, the highly unsatisfactory situation in radiography was brought to light by individuals in the Naval Reactors program trained in other disciplines. What was needed was to look into this field with an open and skeptical mind.



Radiographic practices used by industry have deteriorated. In many companies, small deviations such as incorrect placement of the radiation source of penetrameter or improper film developing techniques produce radiographs of insufficient quality to show defects. Correction of this situation is the responsibility of industrial management. Nevertheless I have had to set up a special task force of representatives from Government, component manufacturers and shipyards to clarify the techniques necessary to meet existing radiography requirements. When material previously considered acceptable was reinspected, using these correct techniques, a high percentage—up to 90 percent—of the welds was found unacceptable.

Frequently these problems occur because inspection personnel lack the competence required to perform the highly skilled job of interpreting radiographs. We found that inspectors often were quite untrained. In fact, they were at times no better qualified to read radiographs than a layman is to interpret his own chest X-ray! We, the customer, have had to set up a special course to train personnel in the interpretation of radiographs!

Besides this unsatisfactory situation in welding, casting and radiography, practical application of nuclear power is also hampered by unresolved problems of fatigue in materials.

Present knowledge of material fatigue under thermal cycling stress is meager. In consequence, we in the reactor group have had to develop special test loops to conduct tests for determining the adequacy of conventional components. Based on results of these tests we have had to change the design of many equipment—valves, nozzles, thermal sleeves— all of which have been in use by industry for many years. Yet fatigue is not peculiar to nuclear propulsion; nor is it a new problem for industry. The Civil Aeronautics Board reports that every year several commercial airplane accidents are caused by fatigue failure of propellers, landing gear, or hydraulic pressure lines. Reporting on a recent helicopter accident caused by fatigue cracking of a main rotor blade, the CAB warned that there was urgent need for better understanding of safe fatigue life of materials and for more conservative design.

2. Poor Workmanship and Poor Quality Control

Modern technology—in nuclear power, in high speed aeronautics, or in high performance computers—requires greater excellence in workmanship and in quality control than has been necessary in the past, and this even in the conventional components used in these advanced systems. This is particularly true for nuclear technology where hazards of radioactivity and difficulty of access for maintenance and repair require workmanship and quality control to be at a much higher level than in normal industrial applications. In the case of submarines, moreover, the crew lives and works between two dangerous environments—the intense sea pressure outside the hull of the ship, and the hot, high pressure primary and secondary systems of the propulsion plant. If the boundaries of either of these pressure containments should fail, serious consequences would result. The reason why I emphasize and insist on design excellence and high quality workmanship is that our nuclear submarines have to operate submerged for long periods of time, even under the Polar ice cap where it may not be possible to come to the surface.

There have been many problems in material identification and control. Recently a reactor component failed to function properly. The plant had to be shut down for several weeks in order to remove this component, determine the cause of failure, and correct it—at considerable expense. We finally traced the cause of failure to the use of the wrong material in a small pin. The material actually used was not as hard as the material specified; under adverse conditions it tended to gall. Yet this component had passed production tests and quality control inspection. The tests and inspection had obviously not been done properly. These problems are not unique to nuclear propulsion; similar incidents occur in other fields, often with serious consequences. The use of a mild steel pin instead of a special hardened steel pin in a ship’s steering gear once caused collision of two surface ships during a replenishment operation at sea.

Recently we discovered that a stainless steel fitting had been welded into a nickel-copper alloy piping system. The fitting had been certified by the manufacturer as nickel-copper, and had all the required certification data including chemistry and inspection results. In fact the words “nickel-copper” were actually etched in the fitting. Yet it was the wrong materials! The system was intended for sea water service; had it been placed in operation with this stainless steel fitting a serious casualty would have resulted. In checking with other customers of this manufacturer we found that they too had received fittings of the wrong material. The manufacturer simply had no effective quality control organization. As a result we now have to check every fitting ever supplied by this manufacturer. The check is only partially completed, but 12 fittings of incorrect material have already been discovered.

I feel rather strongly about this problem. On more than one occasion I have been in a deep submerged submarine when a failure occurred in a sea-water system because a fitting was of the wrong material. But for the prompt action of the crew, the consequences would have been disastrous. In fact I might not be here today.

Not long ago we discovered a mix-up in the marking and packaging of welding electrodes which also could have had very unfortunate consequences. Welding electrodes are purchased in cans, each supposedly containing electrodes of only one type. The cans and the electrodes are individually marked. Early last year a shipyard reported that in one can several electrodes differed from the rest, even though they bore the same color code mark. During the next three months, while we were checking this matter in detail, we detected similar incorrect marking and packaging of electrodes in cans from nearly every major electrode manufacturer in the United States. At our instigation the welding electrode industry has now adopted an improved method of identifying each type of electrode; and has also tightened quality control. Here again industry did not fulfill its obligations. There was no reason why these corrective steps should not have been taken earlier by the manufacturers themselves since this type of electrode mix-up has been going on for years. What were the technical societies doing?

The cases I have given highlight the need for industry to pay more attention to proper identification of materials from the time of melting, through the various fabrication steps and until they are finally installed. Identification must be such as will readily be understood by inspection groups, and must provide means for checking the material right through to the final stage of fabrication.

Another quality control problem is caused by failure to follow specified procedures or drawings. Here is a case in point: Material which had required a special heat treatment was delivered for a shipboard application. On examining the records, we found that the material had been processed at an incorrect temperature and had been in the furnace for an excessive length of time; also that the furnace temperature instruments had been out of calibration. The company concerned could not have done much worse. Replacement of this material resulted in considerable delay. In another case we ordered electrical components that are used to indicate whether a valve is open or closed. After several hundred of these had been installed several failures occurred. It was discovered that a small piece of insulation, required and specified in the drawings, had been left out by the manufacturer. In order to prevent failure of the installed components, they all had to be replaced. Again there was delay and additional work.

Similar cases of poor quality control are prevalent in areas other than nuclear propulsion; areas where safety is just as important. About ten percent of commercial airplane accidents are traceable to poor quality control during maintenance. Take the following CAB report on one particular accident: A worn bolt was found in a control system during an overhaul and removed for replacement. But no new bolt could be found in the shop so the worn bolt was put back “finger tight,” with no locking pin, apparently to stay there until a new bolt could be ordered. No note was made of this, and during the next shift, the overhaul was completed and the airplane was checked out as satisfactory. On a flight next day, vibration caused the loose nut to back off, the pilot lost control and the plane crashed. In another case, a commercial airliner crashed during take-off after a major overhaul because the aileron control cables were reversed.

These examples illustrate there is no such thing as a “detail” which does not require careful review by experienced people. In our program, we try to overcome our quality control problems by setting up special quality control organizations. These teams visit our suppliers and audit the effectiveness of their quality control organizations. The teams discover many deficiencies. Some have been corrected, many have not. The same practice could profitably be applied by companies, both for internal quality control audits and for audits of the subvendors. I believe this would greatly improve the present situation.

Many quality control problems are traceable to lack of pride in workmanship. In one case a reactor component failure was caused by faulty brazing of two copper wires. We found the braze to be so poor that when the insulation was removed the two wires fell apart. This was a common type of joint, used extensively and successfully in electrical components. Obviously, little if any care had been taken to insure the joint was made properly. On rechecking all the components of this design, ten percent were found defective and had to be replaced.

To prevent poor workmanship, quality must be considered as embracing all factors which contribute to reliable and safe operation. What is needed is an atmosphere, a subtle attitude, an uncompromising insistence on excellence, as well as a healthy pessimism in technical matters, a pessimism which offsets the normal human tendency to expect that everything will come out right and that no accident can be foreseen—and forestalled—before it happens.

I am not alone in my concern over the low quality of workmanship in conventional components. Last May, Mr. J. Lorne Gray, President of Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., expressed the thought succinctly to the Canadian Nuclear Association. He said: “Those of you who feel that you always supply equipment and make installations that satisfactorily meet the performance specifications should spend some time at NPD (the 20 EMW Nuclear Power Demonstration reactor recently gone critical) or at any nuclear plant, or even at some of the modern steam plants, during the start-up or running-in period. The very special equipment that has employed the newer materials to very close tolerances and advanced designs is not the major cause of our troubles; it is the poor workmanship in supply, installation and inspection of standard items.” Poor workmanship shows up glaringly in new technology such as nuclear power, missiles, satellites, but it is to be found everywhere, and everywhere it raises cost and causes delay.

In all the cases I have cited the chief responsibility for unsatisfactory delivery and performance rests with industry management. It is the management’s business to establish proper quality control and to hire and train inspection and quality control personnel. Until recently many companies in our program had neither a formal quality control procedure nor a quality control organization. Companies that did have such an organization often had it set up in such a way that the man in charge reported to the production manager. The production manager was thus placed in the position of checking and reporting on his own work—a completely unacceptable state of affairs, on the face of it. Through the efforts of the Naval Reactors Program, especially through our quality control audit teams, significant advances have been made. But we have only scratched the surface.

I assure you I am not exaggerating the situation; in fact, I have understated it. For every case I have given, I could cite a dozen more. The cost in time and money because of industry’s failure to meet contractual specifications is staggering. Worse, with this time and with this money we could have developed improved nuclear power plants and produced many more of them. It is difficult for me to understand why management does not face up to its failure and its responsibility in this respect. Since contracts are sought for, they must be profitable. Despite talk of “the dead hand of government,” it is public money that has paid for all major technological advances made in the past two decades; and public agencies and officials have taken the lead in getting most developments started. Surely industry has as great a stake as every citizen in helping our nation move forward technologically. Industry can best do this by meeting the rising standards of new technologies when it supplies material and equipment.

I only wish I could tell you that the somber situation I have described no longer exists; that our efforts over the past 15 years have been successful in eliminating these problems. But I can’t. As the Naval Reactors Program grows in scope and more companies engage in manufacturing components for it, our difficulties with conventional components multiply; they get worse rather than better. I have no sweeping solution for this never-ending problem, but several things can be done:

First, more effective management and engineering attention should be given to the routine and conventional aspects of our technology. Nothing must ever be taken for granted. Management must get into the details of problems, look at hardware firsthand, analyze the cause of trouble by personal investigation, and take prompt action to prevent recurrence. Management must also remember that things once corrected do not stay corrected. A credo of management ought to be that every human endeavor has a “halflife.”





Second, management and engineers must not conclude that their job is over once drawings have been completed and the first component successfully built and tested to these drawings. This is far from the whole story. To be satisfactory a component not only must perform its function, it must do so reliably and consistently. This requires that it be easy to manufacture, inspect and maintain in the field—by personnel of average skills. This invariably demands simplicity of design, and usually requires redesign of the first model. I don’t believe this concept of what makes a good design is well understood.

Third, industry must take responsibility for developing better understanding of many basic processes in use today. Technical societies such as yours can play an important part here. One way of reaching better understanding is by methodically investigating every problem so as to determine its cause. Customers must inform manufacturers of all deficiencies they discover in equipment. This will help manufacturers improve production performance. In the Naval Reactors Program we make every defect or failure to meet specification, no matter how small, the subject of a special report from the ship or shipyard. This is followed in detail until corrective action has been taken and all concerned are advised of the problem and also of its remedy.

Fourth, specifications and standards must be thoroughly understood, respected, and enforced by manufacturers as well as by customers. It should be of concern to us that specifications are normally written by the manufacturers and therefore usually represent the lowest standard of engineering to which all manufacturers are willing to agree. This should be changed. Specifications and Standards should be set by the customer with manufacturers acting only in a consulting capacity. This is another area in which technical societies could play an important part. They ought to see to it that industry develops comprehensive specifications of high technical quality and that specification requirements are consistently and rigorously enforced. Technical societies must carefully guard against becoming “kept” organizations.

Finally, quality control must be recognized as an essential tool to enable management to meet today’s technological imperatives. Customers must reject deficient equipment and insist that manufacturers meet their commitments. As long as manufacturers find that defective equipment is accepted it is difficult, if not impossible, to get them to improve—to raise their plateau of engineering. One of the best ways you can help raise the level of technical excellence of American industry is by insisting, as I have, on high standards of design, workmanship and quality control.

I hope what I have said will not be dismissed as “unconstructive criticism” or petulant grumbling about difficulties that “ought to be expected.” Robert Hutchins has warned that “an uncriticized society will not endure.” The point I want to make is that, at the levels of technology to which we must rise, the kind of problems we in the Naval Reactors Group have had with conventional components of nuclear plants ought not to be “expected.” They reveal human inadequacies that must be overcome if this nation is to be competitive with its Russian challenger and with the growing power of the European Common Market.

For the first time in our history we face competition without benefit of the special advantages we enjoyed in the past: geographic isolation; enormously greater per capita wealth in land and mineral resources; the largest internal market. From now on we must excel without these advantages.

What I have tried today is to give you an inkling of the factors that hinder progress in reactor technology and in other new engineering development projects as well. During the remainder of this Forty-fourth Annual National Metals Congress you will be hearing about new advances in many fields, particularly in metallurgy. But much of the effort of the huge sums we are spending to achieve these advances will be wasted if problems in conventional and routine areas prevent us from making full use of these advances. It is a commonplace of history that great undertakings often founder because of negligence in some small detail, or because of some minor, obvious and easily corrected mistake.

I submit we must progress, and so we must pay the price of progress. We must accept the inexorably rising standards of technology and we must relinquish comfortable routines and practices rendered obsolete because they no longer meet the new standards.

This is our never-ending challenge.





EIGHT: THE DECISION TO USE ZIRCONIUM IN NUCLEAR REACTORS[1]





In 1975, Admiral Rickover was honored to be the first recipient of the William J. Kroll Medal for Zirconium. This medal is given by the B10 Committee of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) for outstanding contributions to the knowledge of zirconium and its alloys. The award’s namesake invented the extraction process that allowed both zirconium and titanium to be economically manufactured in large quantities. That Rickover was the first recipient of this award is an indication of his contribution to the zirconium industry. This chapter provides insights into how Rickover made engineering decisions and the importance he put on seeking and facing technical facts.





I am honored to be the first recipient of the William J. Kroll Medal for Zirconium. It is gratifying for me because it gives me an opportunity to pay tribute to an outstanding scientist.

I came to recognize his extraordinary qualities in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s. At that time nuclear propulsion for naval ships was far from a reality. Those of us working on the project faced problems at every hand. One of the most crucial was the development of a production process to obtain zirconium once the material was chosen for use in the nuclear reactor. We did not know whether the metal could be produced in sufficient quantities or to the rigid specifications needed for naval reactors.

Dr. Kroll had worked on the development of a zirconium production process at the Bureau of Mines facility at Albany, Oregon. I made several hurried trips to see the work being done at that facility to furnish zirconium for the first naval reactors. Usually Dr. Kroll, then a consultant to the Bureau of Mines, and several senior officials of the Bureau of Mines met me at the Portland airport on Friday evenings. We would drive to Albany, inspect the equipment, and discuss the results of the production effort then underway. Dr. Kroll always gave me straightforward answers. He was a scientist. I am an engineer. Our common interest was zirconium. I think we both understood the problems the other faced. I believe we had this understanding because we based our discussion on principles.

Dr. Kroll was convinced that great advances in science came through the efforts of individuals. He himself exemplified this philosophy. As he wrote in 1955, his early work on zirconium was conducted at his laboratory in Luxembourg where his only assistants were an unskilled laborer, a mechanic, and a secretary. I also have found in my 57 years of naval service that engineering problems are most often solved through the efforts of technically competent individuals, not through the establishment of huge organizations or management systems.

Tonight I will talk about the decision to use zirconium and the principles that lay behind that decision. Circumstances change, events never repeat themselves exactly, but principles are long enduring. Much of what I shall say will be my personal recollections. I recognize, however, that without the zeal and hard work of scores of engineers and scientists from several organizations, zirconium would not be—as it is today—the major structural material in naval reactors and in nearly all of the reactors in central station power plants in the United States.





THE ZIRCONIUM DECISION

In June 1946, I headed a few officers and civilians the Navy had sent to Oak Ridge. Our purpose was to see how nuclear energy could be used to propel naval ships. It was obvious that a nuclear powered submarine could revolutionize naval warfare. But a submarine nuclear propulsion plant posed severe requirements. It had to be compact so that it would fit into a submarine hull. It had to operate when the ship was rolling or pitching, or at an angle when it was diving or surfacing. It had to be safe and reliable. It had to be rugged to meet military demands. Finally, it would have to be operated by young sailors—men who were not scientists or engineers, but who would be carefully trained.

These are engineering problems. At Oak Ridge, we were dazzled by the virtuosity of the scientists. They had accomplished much during the war. We soon discovered that scientists could give us only limited help. The goal of the scientist is to discover the laws of nature. The engineer uses and must obey these laws. The difference is fundamental. Theoretical concepts are crucial to science, but they can have a dangerous and hypnotic effect on individuals who are responsible for practical results. The engineer must seek out technical facts. He cannot run away from them.

The decision to use zirconium in a nuclear reactor is an example of engineering judgment. During 1946 and 1947, several groups of scientists and engineers were investigating metals for use in reactors. Zirconium was one such metal. Stainless steel, aluminum, and beryllium were others. The search was further complicated because several different types of reactors were under study. One of the most promising of these approaches for naval propulsion was the pressurized water reactor. However, for this application, a structural metal was needed which would withstand corrosion at high temperatures for long periods of time, which would maintain its integrity in an environment of intense radiation, and which would not absorb neutrons needed for the nuclear reaction. Furthermore, if the Navy was to have a fleet of nuclear ships, the metal had to be one which could be produced in quantity and at a reasonable cost. Stainless steel, beryllium, and aluminum all had technical disadvantages which weighed against their use.

Zirconium too, did not look promising. Although its corrosion properties appeared reasonable, it was expensive and had never been produced in quantity. In 1945, only a few hundred pounds were manufactured in the United States. The cost was over $300 per pound.[2] Above all, tests showed that zirconium absorbed neutrons needed for the fission process.

This situation changed suddenly. While visiting Oak Ridge in December 1947, I learned that Dr. Kaufman of MIT and Dr. Pomerance of Oak Ridge had just found that zirconium, as occurring in nature, was combined with the element hafnium. It was the hafnium at about 2 percent by weight which gave the zirconium the high level of neutron absorption. They were able to remove the hafnium in the laboratory and obtain zirconium which absorbed only a few neutrons. This was a scientific fact of great importance. At once I decided to choose zirconium for the naval reactor.

But the engineering problems were immense. At the time of this decision there was no assured source of zirconium, no estimate of how much would be needed, no certainty that any known or conceivable process could produce the required amount and no specifications for the nuclear, mechanical, or corrosion qualities the metal had to possess. It was also possible that removing the hafnium could destroy the other qualities that had made zirconium worth investigating in the first place.

The decision was a logical choice for the pressurized water propulsion reactor. It was a risk, but all development is a risk. Once the decision was made we did everything we could to reduce the uncertainty. We did so by trying to find out what were the natural phenomena—which is only another way of saying that we were searching for technical facts. This is the responsibility of engineering—its challenge—and its ethical content. Several organizations helped us by running tests and performance analyses. This sounds simple, but it took us time to work out standards so that the efforts of one group could be compared with those of others. As research was going on to ascertain the engineering properties of zirconium, Dr. Kroll was continuing his work to improve the processes used to manufacture zirconium at low cost.

One reason for working on research and production processes simultaneously was to save time. We urgently needed zirconium for two reactors. The first was the Mark I, the land-based prototype to be built in Idaho to demonstrate the feasibility of installing a compact pressurized water reactor in a submarine. The second was the Mark II which would propel the Nautilus. But there was another reason. The reactor requirements for the chemical purity of the metal influenced the development of production processes; what we learned in one area had an impact on the other. We had to find out these relationships. As difficult as it was, in the long run it was better and less wasteful to carry on both efforts together. We were not thinking of only a few reactors, but of many nuclear ships.

One of the chief obstacles was administrative. I had no authority to obtain production quantities of zirconium. The Atomic Energy Commission and the Navy had established a joint organization in 1948 to develop nuclear power for naval ships. I was assigned to head this effort. In 1949, Westinghouse signed a contract and, after building a laboratory on the abandoned Bettis airfield, near Pittsburgh, began work on the pressurized water reactor. Soon we came up against a hard fact. The Bettis Laboratory needed zirconium. Procuring the metal was the responsibility of another organization of the Atomic Energy Commission. The indication was that the Commission, by following its procedures, could not procure zirconium on the schedule and in the quantity needed. I urged the Commission to authorize Bettis to manufacture zirconium for the Idaho reactor. The Commission overrode my recommendation.

I objected strenuously. I had been assigned the job of developing a nuclear submarine. The schedule called for having the ship ready for operation by January 1955—less than five years away. Zirconium at this moment was crucial in the development of the reactor. Further, this project was the only one committed to zirconium. The Commission was violating the principle that authority must match responsibility. I had been assigned the task, knew the facts, but other people were determining how my requirements should be met.

Certain factors were involved in the crisis. First, production application of the Kroll process was still under development and had not yet produced fully satisfactory metal. Therefore, we had to use the crystal-bar process which, at best, produced material of varying quality. In this technique bars were formed by deposition of volatile zirconium compounds on a heated filament. The individual bars were small and expensive. The Commission took the position that I should wait until a less costly process was available.

The Commission plan to procure the zirconium from a commercial company failed. As a result, Bettis in July 1950 was finally authorized to build a crystal-bar plant. Several organizations and facilities took part in supplying the zirconium needed for processing at Bettis. In August, the Commission transferred the authority to procure zirconium to my own organization. About 85 percent of the metal used for the Mark I reactor was made at Bettis. The rest came from industry sources. The successful operation of the Mark I, which achieved criticality on March 30, 1953 and reached full power on June 25, 1953, vindicated many technical decisions, among them the use of zirconium.





DEVELOPING IMPROVED ZIRCONIUM ALLOYS

There still remained the job of developing a zirconium alloy which would be cheaper to produce and would have less variability in corrosion resistance. In this process the Kroll technique would be the final production step and eliminate the need for the crystal-bar step, an important factor in reducing costs. Test programs at Bettis and elsewhere examined the effects of adding various elements to zirconium. Tin proved most beneficial. A committee composed of men from several organizations who had actually worked on zirconium development recommended an alloy, later called Zircaloy-1, having 2.5 percent tin for the Nautilus reactor.

This was not a gamble. We had by now an active and experienced group of organizations capable of conducting tests and analyzing data. Even as preparations began to manufacture Zircaloy-1, we continued to test. By 1952, data showed that Zircaloy-1, in contrast to the usual behavior of metals, had an increasing rate of corrosion over time. It was clear that we could not use the alloy. Therefore, I stopped further processing of this alloy and began an urgent search for a new one.

Fortunately, Bettis already had underway an active program of corrosion tests. These included the study of a number of zirconium-base alloys which contained other elements to obtain improved corrosion resistance. Included was one ingot in which a small amount of stainless steel had been accidentally added. The tests showed the beneficial efforts or iron, nickel and chromium, which are contained in stainless steel. This discovery was a good example of serendipity. But in another sense, it was not really chance. A well-run project should be able to recognize and take advantage of the unexpected.

Since the Nautilus was already under construction, I had to make a decision immediately. On August 28, 1952, I went to Bettis and reviewed the issue with scientists and metallurgists from Bettis and the Bureau of Mines. I approved their recommendation to establish an alloy which we subsequently called Zircaloy-2. I selected it for the Nautilus reactor before an ingot had ever been melted, fabricated, or tested for corrosion.

Again, the decision was a risk. However, it was made only after careful consideration of the recommendations of individuals who were actually involved in the work—not by managers or administrators. The basic composition of Zircaloy selected that day in August 1952 has continued, to the present, with only minor changes.

Bettis began manufacturing Zircaloy-2 for the Nautilus reactor. That reactor generated power on December 30, 1954, just one day prior to the date I had promised the Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy five years earlier. In less than a month, on January 17, 1955, the Nautilus got underway. This marked the beginning of the era of naval nuclear propulsion.

Development of zirconium, however, still continued. The operational limit for Zircaloy-2 in a reactor was found to be dependent on its absorption of hydrogen during corrosion in high temperature water. Bettis eventually found that replacing nickel with iron produced an alloy which had as good corrosion resistance as Zircaloy-2 but cut hydrogen absorption in half. This alloy, called Zircaloy-4, has since been adopted as the reference structural metal in most naval reactors produced after the mid-1960’s as well as in most civilian power generating station reactors.





DEVELOPING PRODUCTION SOURCES

A basic reason for developing zirconium alloys was to lower the cost of production. This was important, for by the mid-1950’s Congress had authorized several nuclear submarines. My staff and I estimated that our needs for zirconium would reach one million pounds a year within the next five years. Our policy was to procure the zirconium we needed from commercial sources. To do this we had to see that industry could get the information it needed to learn the specifications and the production process. We also had to convince industry that an attractive market existed.

In April 1956, the Wah Chang Corporation contracted to provide 600,000 pounds of zirconium at a price just under $10 per pound. In a few months, under the direction of Mr. Stephen Yih, they were in production. Wah Chang has maintained its position of leadership. Over 70 percent of the zirconium made in the United States is produced at its facility in Albany.

I also sought and received proposals from other companies. In that same year, contracts were placed with three other private organizations. These contracts were fixed quantity, long-term arrangements, aimed at providing the basis for companies to invest capital for large-scale production facilities. This action was the major step in achieving commercial production sources for zirconium. Over ten million pounds of zirconium and about a quarter of a million pounds of hafnium—which is also used in naval reactors—were delivered under these contracts between 1957 and 1963, at an average cost of about $6 per pound.[3]





USE OF ZIRCONIUM IN ELECTRICAL GENERATING STATION REACTORS

The use of zirconium in reactors has not been limited to the Navy. It is also the major reactor structural material in nuclear central stations now being operated and constructed throughout the United States. The first such civilian power station was the Shippingport Atomic Power Station. In July 1953, because of my experience with pressurized water reactors, the Atomic Energy Commission assigned me the responsibility for this project. Under my direction, the Bettis Atomic Power Laboratory designed, developed, and built this reactor.

Official groundbreaking took place on September 6, 1954. President Eisenhower, while visiting his wife’s family here in Denver, used a neutron source to generate an electrical signal. This signal started an unmanned bulldozer at Shippingport to move the first earth on this project. The Shippingport reactor first began operation on December 2, 1957. This date was significant. It was exactly 15 years after Enrico Fermi achieved the first nuclear chain reaction at Stagg Field in Chicago. Within three weeks, the plant reached its full electrical power output which was distributed on the Duquesne Light Company transmission lines serving the Pittsburgh area.

Based on the operation of Shippingport and subsequent nuclear power plants, the commitment by electrical utility companies to nuclear power became much greater during the late 1960’s and early 1970’s. As of March 1, 1975, 55 nuclear powered electrical generating stations, with a capacity of over 39 million electrical kilowatts, were in operation in the United States. These 55 plants, operating at a 70 percent capacity factor, produce in a year the energy equivalent of 410 million barrels of oil, or 110 million tons of coal. All but three of these plants use Zircaloy cladding and structural material.

Based on the projected increased growth of electrical generating plants, it is estimated that by the mid-1980’s the zirconium required for nuclear reactors will be about 15 million pounds per year. The metal will be supplied by a zirconium industry less than 20 years old, and using a process developed less than 25 years ago by Dr. Kroll.





CONCLUSION

I have emphasized in my remarks tonight that the decisions on zirconium were not gambles but risks. This does not mean that success was inevitable. It was not. What I have tried to show is that risk can be narrowed, but it is not easy to do so.

To say that it is necessary to obtain facts is little more useful than offering a soothing platitude. In engineering development, as well as in other fields, finding facts is arduous, exhausting, and time-consuming. They do not exist in isolation. The Romans looked at a constellation in the sky and called it Ursa Major. We call it the Big Dipper. The stars are the same, but we are different from the Romans. So it is with data: the use depends on your goal and your view.

The scientist can follow his quest in pursuit of knowledge; he can, to use popular figures of speech, explore an endless frontier or a boundless horizon. An engineer cannot. He has different responsibilities. He must proceed from one point to another. But even this is drastic oversimplification. The relations between means and the end are dynamic—a change at one point affects others.

It is this fluidity that places a particular responsibility upon the individual in charge of a development project. He cannot separate himself from technical work. He must not allow himself to be isolated by layers of administrators and managers. In Greek mythology, Antaeus was a giant who was strong as long as he had contact with the earth. When he was lifted from the earth he lost his strength. So it is with engineers. They must not be isolated from the real world.

When Dr. Kroll and I met at Albany, we dealt with details. We had to. We understood each other because we based our discussion on principles— his were scientific, mine were engineering. Far too frequently people, particularly those who have just come from universities, are convinced that if they learn the principles, that is all they need to know. As the decision on zirconium shows, that is not so. Of course you need principles, but that is not enough.

The Devil is in the details, but so is salvation.





NINE: THE ROLE OF ENGINEERING IN THE NAVY[1]





According to congressional records, the speech that makes up this chapter was given before a meeting of the National Society of Former Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in Seattle, Washington, on August 30, 1974. Admiral Rickover was 74 at the time and had been in the Navy for 56 years, including his time at the Naval Academy. This chapter is a criticism of leadership based on knowledge of organizational management rather than technical competence—a trend he was observing in the Navy at that time and arguably still a trend today in much of our society.





In ancient times a philosopher came to a city. He was determined to save its inhabitants from sin and wickedness. Night and day he walked the streets and haunted the marketplaces. He preached against greed and envy, against falsehood and indifference. At first the people listened and smiled. Later they turned away; he no longer amused them. Finally, a child moved by compassion asked: “Why do you go on? Do you not see it is hopeless?” The man answered: “In the beginning, I thought I could change men. If I still shout, it is to prevent men from changing me.”

I feel like that man as I talk to you today. I have fought for reform in the Navy for years. If I still shout, it is because I am afraid the Navy will not be able to meet the demands which will be placed upon it in the future. There are two broad reasons for this condition. First, we misread history. Second, we do not ask the root question—What is the Navy’s purpose?

The Navy exists to defend our Nation—it has no other purpose. It serves as a shield in peace as well as in war; for, in final analysis, diplomacy rests upon the deployment and use of military force. We all recognize this truism. What is wrong is that the Navy misreads the lessons of its past wars. It congratulates itself upon the victories and believes that, by merely tampering with its organization, it can meet the needs of today. It does not ask the question: How well did we do compared to how well we should have done?

This question demands a fresh look at our naval past. Instead of basking in past glories, we should ask: How well were the ships designed and built; how well were they used in battle? These are matters of engineering. In discussing engineering in the Navy, I am not going to consider the present state of ordnance in the Navy. That area has been run by line officers throughout this century and its failures are well-known. I will leave that subject to another critic who has the time and experience to describe it. Nor will I address aeronautical engineering, which is a field unto itself administered within the naval aviation command.

What I will talk about today is engineering as it deals with warship design, construction, and operation. How did this type of engineering evolve? How did we get to the fix we are in now, where the Navy is dangerously weak in these technical areas? What must we do to get on the road to recovery?

Throughout naval history there have been two important groups of men: the ones who fought on the ships, and the ones who designed and constructed them. The ones who issued orders in the face of the enemy were the officers of the line of battle—the line officers. Designers and constructors were considered by line officers to be inferior. Yet success on the day of battle depended upon the skill of all.

The Navy of today is far more complex than it has ever been, but the fundamental distinction still exists between the role of the line officer and that of the officer whose specialty is ship design and construction—the naval engineer. The matter is complicated because there are two types of engineers: those at sea operating the machinery and those ashore who are charged with the responsibility for design and development of new ships and their equipment.

Origins of modern engineering in the Navy go back to 1814 with the first steam-driven warship, the Demologos, designed and built by Robert Fulton. In the following decades, the Navy built few ships with steam engines. The early engines were low-powered, unreliable, inefficient, and were used chiefly as an auxiliary to sail. The Navy could easily recruit engineers from civilian life to operate these engines. Engineers were given no military duties as these were the preserve of the line officer, the aristocrat of the Navy. Therefore, from the beginning there was a gulf between the line officer and the engineer who operated the engines. The line officer detested the greasy engineer and his smoking boilers that blackened the sails. Not until 1842 did Congress authorize an engineer corps for the Navy. The selection of the first engineer-in-chief was evidence of the low prestige of naval engineering. Gilbert L. Thompson combined the talents of law, scholarship, and diplomacy, but he knew no engineering. He could not speak for the engineers in the Navy, nor could he judge engineering problems.

Engineering, both in operating the shipboard machinery and in the design and construction of ships, became critically important with the outbreak of the Civil War. The Navy had to blockade a coastline stretching over 3,000 miles from the Potomac to the Mexican border. It had to support the Army on the rivers; it had to search out and destroy Confederate raiders. For all these purposes, the steam engine and the engineer were indispensable. On the day of battle, steam engines drove the Monitor and the Merrimack, the Kearsarge and the Alabama, as well as the gunboats which supported Grant before Fort Donelson and Vicksburg. In 1862, Congress recognized the importance of engineering by creating the Bureau of Steam Engineering.

When Lee surrendered, the United States Navy was the most effective sea power in the world. That position depended upon engineering which, in turn, was based on the skill of Benjamin F. Isherwood, first Chief of the Bureau of Steam Engineering. He designed and built engines rugged enough to withstand the shock of combat, as well as ill-treatment by poorly trained operating engineers. He also designed and constructed a well-armed cruiser which was faster than any abroad. In addition, American naval leadership rested upon ingenious civilian engineers and inventors such as John Ericsson, who designed and built the Monitor.

From this pinnacle of leadership the Navy fell swiftly. We had not learned the lesson of the need for good engineering and competent engineers. As a nation, we became complacent. We believed the Monitor was the embodiment of sea power, yet the turret and armored hulls had already been developed in Europe. Wrapped in the security of ignorance, we became slave to the Monitor-type. We had faith in them as major combatant ships long after other nations had recognized that they were only a brilliant improvisation to a specific problem. The main line of naval progress remained in Europe. We had misread the naval results of the Civil War.

The Navy forgot the hard-earned lessons and attempted to return to the days of sail. Aboard ship, the position of the engineer deteriorated. The chief engineer and his men were at the beck and call of the line officer. He was denied the living quarters to which he was entitled. He was forced to give way to the most junior line officer. He was not even allowed to eat in the same mess with the line officers. He found his firemen taken from his control and set to work shifting sails. One chief engineer complained that he could not overhaul and repair the machinery because he did not have use of his men. The captain replied that he needed the engineering force for deck drills; if repairs to the engines were necessary, they could be made at night. Under these conditions the Navy had trouble recruiting and holding engineers, and ships failed to meet their commitments. The Acting Chief of the Bureau of Steam Engineering, William H. H. Smith, officially warned in 1883 that the Navy’s standards had dropped below those for merchant ships. If a private shipowner operated with as few engineers, he could not insure his ship, and would be liable to criminal prosecution.

When the United States began to rebuild its Navy in the 1880’s, it faced serious difficulties. The Nation had fallen behind in marine engineering, in naval architecture, and in ordnance. Because the Navy had built few ships in the previous decades, there had been no need for men skilled in naval design and construction. The United States did not have the facilities to build modern armored vessels, nor did the Navy or industry have the ability to design them. We had to import the technical knowledge, chiefly from England. In addition, the line officers had lost their professional competence because our naval ships had become obsolete. Therefore, the engineers and the line officers who were engaged in the design of new ships lacked experience.

To coordinate ship design and construction, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy, in 1889, set up the Board on Construction. Its membership varied, but always included the Chiefs of the Bureaus of Construction and Repair, Steam Engineering, Equipment, and Ordnance. The Engineer-in-Chief of the Navy headed the Bureau of Steam Engineering, while the Chief Constructor headed Construction and Repair. They were professional engineers and naval architects. Line officers usually were Chiefs of the Bureau of Equipment and the Bureau of Ordnance.

Under these conditions, mistakes were inevitable. But, by and large, the worst errors were caused by the imposition of the opinions of line officers on technical matters. The result can be seen in the Navy’s first three battleships, one of which was the famous Oregon. The Bureau of Ordnance, headed by a line officer, proposed a turret and gun arrangement based on the hoped-for success of technical developments. When these did not materialize, the turrets had to be redesigned. As a result, when any of these ships swung its guns to deliver a broadside, it heeled over to such an extent that the armor belt on the side toward the enemy dipped below the waterline, giving no protection to the ship.

Another example of poor design occurred during the planning of the Kentucky class battleships, laid down in 1896. The main battery was to be two turrets with a pair of 13-inch guns, and two turrets with a pair of 8-inch guns. The Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance proposed that the 8-inch turrets be placed on top of and integral with the 13-inch turrets. The 8-inch turrets could, therefore, not rotate independently. Whatever the 13-inch guns aimed at, so did the 8-inch guns on the turret above. The Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance—a line officer—got his plan accepted over the strenuous objections of the Chief Constructor. Theodore Roosevelt, as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, was aware of the serious criticism of this design. Yet he also knew that the Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance was a line officer of great prestige among his brother officers. This episode was an instance—not uncommon in the Navy—where officers with a reputation in one field are assumed to be expert in another.

The Battle of Santiago, during the Spanish-American War, revealed that line officers did not know how to use their ships. The military situation was simple. An American squadron, consisting mainly of two armored cruisers and five battleships, had bottled up a Spanish force of four cruisers and two torpedo boats. To save coal while on blockade, captain after captain had cut down on the number of boilers in operation. In the two armored cruisers, half the engines had been uncoupled from the propeller shafts to save coal. When the Spanish came out of the Santiago Channel Sunday morning, July 3, 1898, the Navy was caught by surprise. All the Spanish ships in the battle were sunk or run aground; victory was won. Yet an analysis of the results showed little cause for complacency.

The engines of the entire fleet should have been prepared for battle, but only the Oregon had been ready. She had won her place in American history by her dash from Bremerton, around Cape Horn to Cuba in a voyage which had been an engineering triumph. After the Oregon joined the blockade, her captain sent for his engineer, Robert W. Milligan. He urged Milligan to cut down on the number of boilers. Milligan replied that he would obey such an order—provided it was made in writing, and provided he could submit a written protest. In Milligan’s words: “Damn the economy, efficiency is what we want.” The captain withdrew his suggestion. Milligan used his coal carefully, but he kept fires lit under all his boilers. When the battle came, the Oregon was one of the few vessels the Spanish could not outrun.

Milligan was one of those old-fashioned engineers who was never far from his engines. He was one of that breed of men taught by experience. These engineers—and I proudly and with no false humility class myself with them—could walk through an engine room and, through the din and uproar, catch the slight sound of a component out of adjustment. They could touch a jacket of metal and feel from the vibrations whether the machinery inside was operating well. They would taste boiler water to see if it were pure, and would dip their fingers into the lubricating oil to find out if a bearing was running hot.

Milligan also gave responsibility to his young subordinates. In the Oregon, during her trip around South America and during the Battle of Santiago, Naval Cadet William D. Leahy served in the engine room. There he stood watches, was in charge of stowing coal, and clambered over boilers and furnaces to inspect and maintain them. Leahy, one of the outstanding naval leaders of World War II, could have received no better example of professional leadership.

It took time to learn the Lessons of the Spanish-American War. The shooting at Santiago had been poor. Of all the shots fired, only 1.3 percent hit the target. Fortunately, enough hits were made to set the Spanish cruisers on fire. Three years later—in 1901—the North Atlantic Squadron, consisting of three battleships, fired at a hulk 78 feet long and 30 feet high at ranges of about a mile and a half. Despite ideal weather, only one out of 185 shots hit the target. As the admiral commanding the squadron reported, it was a “percentage of only 54/100 of 1%.”

There are several explanations for this bad showing, including poor training and badly designed gun mounts and sights. Perhaps the record wasn’t much worse than that of other navies at this general time. But these are excuses. The proper question was then—as it is today—how well did the Navy do compared to what it should have done?

The Spanish-American War temporarily interrupted a move which would have straightened out the place of the engineer aboard ships. George W. Melville, Chief of the Bureau of Steam Engineering, spoke for the engineers when he complained to Congress: “I have got tired of being the bastard . . . son of the Navy.”

Two solutions were possible. One was to strengthen the engineers so that their status and responsibilities were clearly defined and recognized. The second was to merge the engineers into the line. Because of the increasing complexity of ships, the Personnel Act of 1899 followed this second approach. As Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Theodore Roosevelt said: “Every officer on a modern war vessel in reality has to be an engineer whether he wants to or not.” But, as Melville pointed out, the Act would only work if the line officers accepted their engineering responsibilities at sea in good faith.

Some did, others did not. In 1905, a boiler explosion aboard the gunboat Bennington, at anchor in San Diego harbor, cost 65 lives. Subsequent investigation revealed that the chief engineer was an ensign who had never stood an engine room watch before being assigned to the billet. He knew nothing of machinery, and he did not have the technical knowledge to stop the chain of events that led to the tragedy. He had never been required, nor given the opportunity, to acquire the necessary knowledge. The Bennington disaster was an extreme example of how far some line officers had yet to go to recognize the need for proficiency in engineering on board ship. The old way was simply not good enough. Captain Bradley A. Fiske, testifying in 1908 before the Senate Naval Affairs Committee, made a telling point, as true today as it was then; “A navy, after all, is nothing but a collection of machines, operated by men. Men are always men. They do not change very much, but machines change a great deal.”

The year in which Fiske spoke was during a period of naval reform. The United States was well on its way to becoming one of the great powers. Yet most of the new naval technology was being copied from abroad. The lead in developing the Dreadnought-type of battleship had been seized by the British; the first marine turbine was of British origin. Admiral William S. Sims, the officer who is credited with teaching our Navy how to shoot, used training procedures he had copied from the British. The Navy could also rely on American industry as another source of technology. Although this was a period of rapid growth, there was a serious weakness. The status of the engineer aboard ship was by now satisfactory, but the importance of the design engineers—those who could design ships and machinery—had been forgotten.

By 1916, the Navy recognized it could no longer neglect the design engineer. That year Congress passed an act which established the engineering duty only officer—usually abbreviated as EDO. The Act reflected the controversy that had troubled the Navy for decades. The EDO’s were line officers, but specialized in design engineering. Because they could not assume military command, they were known as “restricted” line officers.

The Navy learned little from World War I even though the Germans had come close to victory with the submarine; we took little heed of that danger after the war. Instead, we held fleet exercises in which battleships steamed in formation and maneuvered, just as they had at the Battle of Jutland in 1916. In these exercises our submarines were used on the surface to protect the battleships. Again, as we later learned at the outset of World War II, the right questions were not being asked.

One reason was, instead of devoting full time to the condition of our ships, top Navy officials also spent time on unimportant matters. As an example, between World Wars I and II the Secretary of the Navy promulgated a General Order—the highest type of official directive that can be issued—concerning the Navy’s homing pigeon establishment. This Order divided responsibilities for the care and operation of pigeons among the Bureau of Engineering, the Bureau of Construction and Repair, the Bureau of Navigation, and the Director of Naval Communications. All these organizations were involved in pigeons at one time or another. Their responsibilities included, among other things, pigeon population and banding, transportation, housing and food. There were also plans and literature concerning the pigeon service, miscellaneous equipment, and other pigeon problems.

The pigeon service has now been abandoned by the Navy. That, along with the disbanding of the last detachment of Indian Scouts in 1943, and the requirement for Army aviators to wear spurs in 1938, is one of the rare occasions in U. S. military history where a function has been abolished.

Today—with the inflated rank in the Navy—if we still had the pigeon service—the senior pigeon in the pecking order would, I suppose, be a line admiral. It would be claimed, as the argument so often goes, he needed this rank to deal effectively with his peers in the Army, the Air Force, and the other foreign pigeon services.

Between World Wars I and II, there was a reasonable balance among the line officers and the technical officers responsible for design and construction of ships. Few new ships were built immediately after World War I, so that line officers had a chance to learn how to use battleships, destroyers, submarines, and to experiment with aircraft carriers. The EDO’s, in turn, had time to become educated in their profession. They were selected from line officers who, after six or seven years of sea duty following graduation from Annapolis, had been ordered to the Naval Postgraduate School at Annapolis for a course in naval engineering design. The latter part of this course was taken at a first-rate civilian college, such as Columbia or the University of California. After completing their two years of scholastic work, these officers returned to sea duty. Only several years later were a few of them designated EDO’s. By that time they had about 15 years of commissioned service. Consequently, when the Navy began to rebuild in the 1930’s, it had a group of able line officers—among them King, Halsey, Leahy, Nimitz, and Spruance—and some able engineers and constructors— among them Bowen, van Keuren, Cochrane, Robinson, and Mills—with the technical competence to meet its needs.

The Navy was at its apogee at the end of World War II. Again we were misled by the magnitude of the victory. The United States could afford to overlook errors of leadership in the line and in engineering because we had the time and resources to outproduce the enemy. Today this is no longer true. We must be ready to defend ourselves with what we have.

Since the end of World War II, I have witnessed the deterioration of the technical competence of the Navy when compared to the job the Navy has to do. One reason is lower personnel standards. Many officers who came into the Navy during the war had reached fairly high rank. They had served their country well, but lacked the qualifications the Navy needed in its officers. The decrease in personnel standards led to a decline in standards of competence. In the non-nuclear surface ships, officers were—and are at this moment—no longer required to qualify as operating engineers.

In the period before World War II, line officers were required to complete a formal qualification in the operation of the engineering department of their ship. Since World War II, the Navy has ignored the need for line officers to acquire operating experience in engineering. There are now no requirements for the captain of a ship to have served in the engineering department before he takes command. The result is that many captains have little knowledge, respect, or regard for their engineering plants; they do not know how to make a critical inspection of these plants, nor can they even evaluate the recommendations of their people. Is it any wonder that ships—even new ones—are frequently found in poor material condition by outside inspectors?

The emphasis on operational engineering experience is just the opposite in nuclear ships. Since the beginning, I have required all nuclear ship captains, as well as their subordinate officers, to qualify as operators of the propulsion plant before being assigned to a ship. Prior to being assigned as chief engineer, executive officer, or captain of a nuclear ship, the nuclear trained officer must successfully complete a comprehensive eight-hour written examination and a three-hour oral examination at my headquarters in Washington. I personally approve or disapprove all examination results. Before he is permitted to take this examination, he must first have completed one year of academic and operational training which includes qualification as a watch officer on a fully operational, land prototype nuclear propulsion plant similar to the ones we have at sea. An engineering department officer, once he has completed his initial training, must qualify as a watch officer in a nuclear ship and serve in the engineering department for at least one year. To be eligible for the examination, he must also be recommended by his commanding officer.

These requirements produce line officers who are familiar with the operating details of their propulsion plants and are not afraid to get their hands dirty. When reports from subordinates conflict, or where they doubt the accuracy, they know enough to look for themselves and to put the weight of their own experience behind the decision. They also know how to train their officers and men and inspect their plant. They possess that essential requisite of leadership—to educate and train. I would much rather have officers with this sort of experience than ones with postgraduate degrees in systems analysis, computer science, management or business administration—as many of the Navy’s line officers have. The machinery does not respect these irrelevant capabilities.

In the rest of the Navy, engineering at sea has been relegated to a subordinate position. This is a serious mistake. Ships will not be able to fight effectively if they cannot get underway, or otherwise meet their operational requirements.

Despite the vast increase in technology, the Navy, also, has gone downhill in the areas dealing with ship design and construction. The Bureau of Ships, which inherited these responsibilities when it was established in 1940 by the amalgamation of the Bureau of Construction and Repair and the Bureau of Engineering, failed to take steps to maintain a strong cadre of competent officer and civilian engineers who could control the increasing technical workload and build a strong engineering organization able to meet the demands of the new technologies.

I cannot overemphasize the importance of the technological factor. For man to take full advantage of modern technology, he must raise his standards of knowledge and performance. The high temperatures, pressures, and speeds needed today require the use of metals close to their ultimate limits. Therefore, the utmost care is needed in the engineering, manufacture, installation, and operation of equipment aboard ship, and in the design and construction of the ship itself. The rising tide of technological complexity has engulfed the design engineer ashore as well as the line officer engineer at sea. In both areas, these men now face demands far beyond those which confronted their predecessors. In the face of these challenges, some of the senior EDO’s have seemed to be more concerned with getting the perquisites of military command of Navy yards rather than running the technical aspects of their jobs.

To meet the demands of the technological revolution we had witnessed since World War II, the Navy had two choices. It could make the strenuous effort needed to keep abreast of technology. Or it could let technical competence fall from its grasp; placing its dependence on industry, tinkering with its organization and, through various makeshift arrangements, attempt to keep track of the technical developments upon which its future depended. The decision was to rely on reorganization and management techniques. The result was a flood of studies and an endless series of reorganizations, all of which increased emphasis on “management’ and decreased the reliance on technical competence.

A chief characteristic of the reorganizations was the increasing influence of the line officer in technical matters. The line officer does have an important responsibility to think through and set the requirements for ships and weapons. But in the years since World War II, he has become deeply involved in making decisions on technical matters for which his training has not qualified him. Instead of deciding what he needs, he is now often deciding how his needs shall be met.

Up through the Civil War and beyond, there was absolute civilian control in the Navy. The Secretary of the Navy had the responsibility for promoting officers, for assigning them to commands, and for directing ship movements. Bit by bit the line officers managed to obtain some authority in these areas. A Secretary of the Navy in the time of Theodore Roosevelt complained: “My duties consist of waiting for the Chief of the Bureau of Navigation to come in with a paper, put it down before me with his finger on a dotted line and say to me, ‘Sign your name here.’ It is all any Secretary of the Navy does.” This powerful bureau chief was a line officer. Finally, in 1915, the line officers achieved their goal of controlling the military operation of the Navy through the establishment of the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations.

When Congress established that position, it was clearly understood that the Chief of Naval Operations—the Navy’s highest ranking military officer— was subordinate to the Secretary of the Navy, and that his job was to prepare the Fleet and keep it ready for war. He could give recommendations on the shipbuilding program, but not make the decisions. He did not control the technical bureaus which were concerned with ship design and construction; the chiefs of these bureaus reported directly to the Secretary. The Navy was divided into what was called a bilinear organization. One line of authority and responsibility, that for operational matters, extended from the Secretary to the Chief of Naval Operations. The other line extended from the Secretary to the chiefs of the bureaus. Ship design and construction were handled by the Chief of the Bureau of Ships who reported directly to the Secretary. Occasionally a Chief of Naval Operations attempted to expand his power over the bureaus. Admiral King tried to do so during World War II. President Franklin D. Roosevelt at once saw the issue. Roosevelt was no novice in naval affairs. He had been Assistant Secretary of the Navy from 1913 to 1920—not only a long period of time, but also during the years of World War I. The President gave as his reason for opposing King that:

“We ought not to have all the administrative problems of personnel and material, shore establishments, production, etc., go up through the Chief of Naval Operations. When you come down to it, the real function of the Chief of Naval Operations is primarily naval operations—no human being can take on all the responsibilities of getting the Navy ready to fight. He should know all about the state of that readiness, and direct the efforts of it. . . . If they are not ready to fight, or are slow in getting ready, it is his function to raise hell about it. Details of getting ready to fight ought not to bother him.”

And, mind you, this was said when the Navy had not yet reached a fraction of the technical complexity it has today.

Roosevelt clearly understood the distinction between the role of the line officer and that of the technical officer. Unfortunately, some of the policy makers who came later did not.

At the time Secretary McNamara took over the Defense Department in 1961, there was a dire need to reform the Navy’s method of handling development, procurement, and maintenance of warships. The basic need was to establish groups of technically competent people with clear authority and responsibility for executing the various Navy programs, similar to the strong technical management approach that prevailed in the nuclear propulsion program and later in the POLARIS missile program. There was also a need for strong technical groups in the shipyards and industrial contractor organizations to carry out the technical development work, under close technical direction from the Government headquarters organization. These needs were not being met.

The Navy, obviously, had not done a good job, so when Secretary McNamara took office, the Navy was, quite properly, investigated and much was found in need of improvement. Unfortunately, the changes he made were in the wrong direction. He took the advice of analysts and management experts rather than seeking the advice of people with technical expertise. He changed the administration of the Navy’s technical work to coincide with the Air Force organizational method; he established the Naval Material Command—a Command to be responsible for the design, development, and procurement of all naval equipment and the supporting shore establishment—to be similar to the Air Force Material Command. He did not recognize that procurement of warships is a far different matter than procurement of aircraft. He appointed a line officer as the Chief of Naval Material. He eliminated the technical bureaus and assigned their functions to new “Systems Commands” under the Chief of Naval Material. Most of the technical people in the Bureau of Ships—other than in my nuclear propulsion organization—were removed to a new Naval Ship Engineering Center located in an outlying area, which was established as a field activity of the Naval Ship Systems Command. They are now merely consultants and are no longer responsible for what happens.

This reorganization, which created a new bureaucracy now grown to about 800 people—the Office of the Chief of Naval Material—added another huge layer of management between the technical people who have to deal with the engineering details if they are to get the job done, and the people in charge whose approval must be obtained to proceed. They are empowered to ask any and all questions and to stop the work from proceeding. Their endorsement must be obtained prior to forwarding a recommendation to higher authority in the chain of command. But there is no one that I can find in the Naval Material Command who has the authority to approve proceeding with programs.

Subsequently, the organization was again changed to have the Chief of Naval Material report to the Chief of Naval Operations rather than directly to the Secretary of the Navy, thus ending the bilinear organization of the Navy.

That change, which President Roosevelt had prevented in 1942, was supposed to keep the Chief of Naval Operations in the responsible chain of command. However, the net effect on the technical people was to add still another layer of management through which to fight proposals before they could get approval. To understand the overwhelming and detrimental effect of these changes, it must be realized that every officer and civilian in the Offices of the Chief of Naval Material and the Chief of Naval Operations regards himself as senior to the Commanders of the technical Systems Commands, and feels free to introduce his thoughts, questions, and desires into any technical matter coming through his office. These people involve themselves in every aspect of ship design, construction, and procurement, including the construction of shore facilities and settlement of contract claims.

Recently, serious consideration was even given to placing a line officer in charge of the Systems Command which is responsible for the design and construction of all warships. If that move had been carried out, it would have marked the final takeover by the line officers of every aspect of naval technical work. At the last moment, that proposal was fortunately abandoned.

The staff of the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) has grown in recent years, until it now includes 65 admirals. This is about twice as many as were assigned to Fleet Admiral King’s staff at the height of World War II. In addition, the CNO staff has more than 300 captains in comparison to only 187 billets for captains to command all ships and squadrons at sea. There are also over 320 commanders on the CNO staff, as well as many senior civilians and lower-ranking officers. These staff officers get involved in technical matters for which they have no qualifications. Recently, I attended a CNO meeting at which the only subject discussed was technical ship characteristics. In addition to the large number of line admirals present, there was also a Marine general—although the meeting had nothing to do with the Marine Corps. He volunteered no comments; how could he?

The purpose of the Navy has become lost in its organizational complexity. New layers of administrators and managers, civilian and naval, are interposed between the high echelons of the Navy and the people who are doing the actual work—the hewers of wood and drawers of water. The Navy no longer has adequate in-house technical capability. There was far greater technical competence in the Bureau of Ships in 1939 for the job it had to do to prepare for World War II, than there exists now to meet the needs of today.

The growing dependence upon management systems has been another characteristic which has evolved in the years since World War II. Secretary McNamara, instead of requiring the Navy to build up its in-house technical capability, decreed that it should depend on industry. The Navy could “manage” the projects which it assigned to industry. His successors have followed the same path. I have learned from many years of bitter experience that we cannot depend on industry to develop, maintain, and have available a technical organization capable of handling the design of complex ships and their equipment without the Navy, itself, having a strong technical organization to oversee the work in detail.

Management systems are as endemic to the Government as the Black Plague was in Medieval Europe. Brochure after brochure crosses my desk offering seminars and courses in management. Usually these are aimed at Government officials. Details vary, but the substance is the same. For a substantial fee, paid by the Government, and for a few days spent in pleasant surroundings, those attending the seminars will be taught management. Usually the agenda contains numbers: seven trends of management, five differences between a leader and a manager, four functions of a leader, five ideas for improving human relations, and The purpose of the Navy has become lost in its organizational complexity. three basic situations. There are gimmicks. I have a pocket-sized plastic card, complete with different colored eggs and long-sweeping arrows and fine print. Problems go one way, decisions another, and plans in yet a third direction. Presumably a person, faced with a decision, has only to pull out this card and follow the arrows. That is if he has the time and the patience, and can comprehend it. I can’t.

A management system is broad and sweeping in its generalities. But technical problems are a matter of detail. The devil is in the details. Management systems cannot help when the difficulties are technical. A badly designed machine, on which the safety of the ship and its crew may depend, is impervious to the blandishments of a management system. But a badly designed machine will yield to an exhaustive analysis by a technically trained man.

What if Columbus had applied modern management systems to his proposed voyage? He would have attended management seminars. He would have studied tables with brightly colored squares and broad arrows to show which way plans, decisions, and problems were to go. He would not have bothered with details such as navigation and seamanship. These were technical matters. He would simply have “managed” the voyage. He would have used a colored-plastic decision-making card. Further, his analyst—I mean systems analyst—would have presented him with several volumes proving that the venture was not cost-effective. America would never have been discovered. We would all be Indians.

It is hard to describe how pervasive management systems are; how they have dulled the sharp edge of purpose and competence. Nor are line officers the only ones to depend on the teachings of modern management. A recent Chief of the Bureau of Ships told his engineers that their key role was management in a technological revolution. He did not deny the need for technically trained people, but stated that management was the job of engineering officers in Washington. Moreover, he noted approvingly that engineers, more used to dealing with verifiable facts, had participated in courses to enable them to deal efficiently with unpredictable human beings. In my experience, there are not many facts in a rapidly advancing field. Finding out what they are consumes all the time of a good engineer. It is upon knowing these technical facts that the Navy depends—not upon people taken from their jobs to become skilled at human relations.

Management systems have a vogue. Not too long ago the PERT system had a great vogue in government and industry. PERT is an acronym for Program Evaluation and Review Technique and was developed within the POLARIS missile program. Several business journals hailed the system as a totally new management tool. It was even welcomed by some engineers. Nothing is heard of it today. A political scientist analyzing the POLARIS program concluded after several interviews that PERT was a sham. It was simply used to get political and financial support. Why was it welcomed so loudly and accepted so widely? How was it that so many business and industrial leaders adopted a system they later found worthless? Recently, I proposed to the editor of a leading business journal that this question was well worth his study. My suggestion was serious. For, although a system may wither away, it leaves a residue. And another system comes along.

Management is taught at Annapolis. This has done serious harm to its young graduates. My people and I interview midshipmen before they enter the nuclear program. We do this because it takes time, effort, and expense to train an officer to operate nuclear ships. We cannot afford to penalize men who are working hard to learn atomic power plant technology by wasting our resources on individuals who have been taught the easy social science courses, or who cannot or will not make demands upon themselves. We must also select men who will seek facts and face them. Officers in nuclear ships cannot rely on theory alone. One midshipman, who had taken management courses, told me that he was able to learn my job in six months; he could run General Electric in a year.

It was not his fault. It was no crime for him to give this answer. He had been taught by his supposedly responsible and knowledgeable professors that his job was to “manage.” It will take some of these men years to unlearn the Annapolis social science propaganda, and some never will. What is tragic is that often these young men have good potential as naval officers. They report to the Academy expecting to be taught the elements of the naval profession and have no reason to expect otherwise. Instead, they learn that a naval officer shouldn’t bother with technical details. All he needs to know are broad concepts on how to manage. Someone else will do the work. There will always be available to him a sufficient number of cheerful, willing, competent, hard-working “serfs” to do the technical work, as well as the money to do the job. He will be the leader, the aristocrat.

There exists a great temptation in a man’s life to commit himself to the dogma of his youth, and to base his entire life’s work on that dogmatic foundation. This temptation is fostered by the cult of management, and this is why management studies should be banned from the Naval Academy. Many of its graduates, leading the sheltered naval life, never reexamine this doctrine; never afterward do they fully experience the world of reality. They would be totally lost if suddenly the dogma handed down should prove to be fallacious.

Though we may stop asking questions the day we obtain our diplomas, the Navy we are committed to serve and enhance will not. It keeps asking us whether we know what we are doing; it keeps asking us why the Navy we have desired and built over the past 50 years is in its present state.

The service academies once gave professional education in engineering. Early graduates of West Point did much to develop our waterways and our railroads. In fact, for many years West Point was the only school that taught civil engineering. After some uncertain beginnings, Annapolis, too, gave good engineering and professional courses. The curricula of the academies was based on the assumption that the military service was a profession, but since the end of World War II, Annapolis, at least, has changed. It has added more and more social science courses so that it now produces men more fitted for civilian life—if even for that—than for a career in the Navy. Even rewards for scholastic ability do not lead midshipmen further toward their careers. I recently learned of a midshipman who will spend his senior year studying “The Effects of Low Frequency Electromagnetic Fields on the Circadian Biorhythms of Common Mice.” We are raising a generation of naval officers who are ill-equipped to carry out their jobs in peace or war. Again, it is a question of purpose. What is Annapolis for? Does a naval officer need to know the rhythms of mice?

Nor are engineering and science adequately stressed as undergraduate requirements for many other young officers entering the Navy today. The Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC), which annually supplies more new officers for the Navy than the Naval Academy, is a case in point. Over the years officers commissioned through this program have been allowed to pursue practically any undergraduate major they desire. The Navy therefore finds itself subsidizing prospective anthropologists, foresters, sociologists, or perhaps even landscape architects—skills not needed by the Navy. To pay for this training is a waste of Navy funds.

Young officers today must be able to understand the technical details of their equipment and they cannot do this without learning the fundamentals of engineering and science. I have been recommending for years that, as a minimum, all NROTC students be required to take mathematics through integral calculus and at least one year of college physics. Despite these efforts, I have only been partially successful in convincing those responsible that this should be done.

There are also signs that the Naval War College has lost its sense of purpose. That college was founded in 1884 to give a few naval officers a chance to think about strategy. But today strategy is one among other themes. For example, in the Naval War College Review of January, 1972, the lead article was entitled “A Revolution in Organization Concepts.” A single sentence sums up the author’s philosophy: “A person’s ability to manage his own affairs or those of any public or private organization or institution depends less on the methods, techniques, and tools he employs than on his understanding of, and attitudes toward, the world that contains him and the groups of which he is a part.” Put another way, he is saying that an attitude is more important than knowing the details of a job. The article’s author has taught in several colleges here and abroad, and at one point was a professor of city planning and a co-author of a book on management. But would you go to a doctor who believes his “world outlook” is more important than his medical knowledge?

Contrast this philosophy with that of another article in the same issue of the Review. It describes how Admiral Joseph Mason Reeves, who was Commander of the United States Fleet in 1934, gathered officers of all ranks for a lecture at the War College. He told them: “In everything we do, we must ask ourselves: does this directly advance preparation for war? . . . If war comes, this Fleet must fight ‘as is.’ You must fight at sea and not on paper.” These two examples from the Review go to the heart of the matter—one is professional advice from an experienced naval officer; the other is not.

The Navy is raising a generation of officers who believe that technical training is not essential and that they can rely on management techniques to make decisions. For these officers, the road to advancement in many cases leads through the non-professional areas of the Navy, such as politicalmilitary affairs, foreign sales, planning and budgeting, human relations. Further, they want subordinates with whom they can be comfortable rather than those who are qualified. On the other hand, the Russians do not put management experts into highly technical positions. A recent Soviet listing indicates that the head of the Russian space program is a design engineer who has been associated with Soviet rocket development since World War II.

The dependence on management systems has been an important factor in the loss of technical competence in ship design and construction. For example, over the years, with monotonous regularity, representatives from large and well-known companies propose to undertake—at Government expense—studies of small, high-speed ships propelled by small, cheap, light-weight nuclear power plants. These proposals are enticing to officer managers who do not understand the technical flaws, and are swayed by the miraculous achievements promised by these representatives—with their high-sounding management titles—who seek Government contracts. The officers are dazzled by titles because they have been accustomed throughout their career to regard rank and title as the measure of competence.

My people and I find that the technical bases for these proposals are unsound. When we object to these schemes on scientific and engineering grounds, we are told that we are unimaginative and stubbornly conservative, that we could make these systems work if we really tried and wanted to do so. Such an argument reduces all engineering to the simple matter of personal will. We are constantly faced with people who believe in the idea of overcoming existing difficulties by trying something even bolder and more difficult. Like all exaggerated gallantry, such a course is attractive but unrewarding.

Senior line officers have lived most of their lives in an operating environment where they issue orders to which they obtain immediate execution by their subordinates. When they assume command of a technical organization, they become frustrated when the response to their directives is inadequate or delayed.

I well remember when, many years ago, a senior line admiral issued a directive which said “There will be no more rust.” They do not understand that technical directives are not self-executory, because they involve far more than compliance with the type of order required to change ship course or speed. Such a directive may require a large amount of engineering work and take much time and the work of many engineers; it may not even be possible of achievement. Nor do they understand that a complex engineering directive requires more than a management decision; it requires also a strong technical organization to carry it out.

The most important job of the man in charge of a technical organization is to select and train the technical people working for him—not to issue orders and directives. But to do so he, himself, must be technically competent. No one, no matter how high his position, can accomplish a technical aim by simply ordering it. Nature knows no rank.

The loss of professionalism among the engineers, and the interference of line officers in technical matters, has resulted in naval ships of questionable design. I do not include our nuclear ships in this category—but only because of my ability to insist upon the contrary.

If the acceptance of unsound proposals illustrates the technical poverty of those officers and civilians in the Navy who are managing technical projects, the 1,200 pound boiler is an example of incompetence on board ship. The Navy has had difficulty with these boilers, which deliver steam at a pressure of 1,200 pounds per square inch. They have been hard to operate, and men have lost their lives in accidents with them. These boilers are important because well over one hundred of our escort ships and seven of our thirteen aircraft carriers are fitted with these boilers. Consequently, when the Navy had trouble with them, a significant number of important ships were involved.

My organization discovered that at the basic school ashore, the sailors were being trained to stand watches on and record the water level of a boiler that had no water in it. This is the equivalent of teaching your sons and daughters to drive by letting them sit in the garage behind the wheel, but never turning on the engine or putting the car in motion. And then sending them out on the highways to earn their living as truckdrivers. On board escort ships, we found commanding officers who had never given the boilers priority. I talked to admirals who were responsible for the care of these ships, yet had never seen the boilers which were giving them so much trouble— and a number of these ships could not operate.

What is the condition of the ships in our Fleet? In my opinion, there has been no period in the past 50 years where the Fleet has been in as poor condition as it is today. This is often excused because of the Vietnam War and the inadequate appropriations for shipbuilding and ship repair. It appears to me that the prime reason for the inability of the officers of the Fleet to supervise their equipment is their lack of training. The poor condition of the Fleet is well-documented in official reports of the Board of Inspection and Survey of the last few years.

I have gone into the historical background to show that the problems the Navy is facing today are not new. More often than not, the line officers and the engineers, aboard ship or ashore, have been in conflict. Nothing I have said is intended to give the impression that engineers do not make mistakes. But engineers are less likely to make mistakes in engineering than line officers who make engineering decisions. The pendulum has swung too far in the direction of the line officer. I would be just as disturbed if the balance favored the engineer. The issue is not whether one group is exalted over the other; the issue is the very purpose of the Navy. On October 15, 1912, President Taft said: “A navy is for fighting, and if its management is not efficiently directed to that end the people of the country have a right to complain.”

What Taft said in 1912 applies today. So does Roosevelt’s statement made fifteen years earlier: “Every officer on a modern war vessel . . . has to be an engineer. . . .” Defining purposes is deceptively easy. Setting standards is not hard. What is difficult is to keep them firm—to prevent them from being eroded by people more interested in their careers and their status than in the organization. This is a hard lesson to learn. Those who ask again and again the simple question “Does this make sense?” are accused of disloyalty. We should not be loyal to the idea of loyalty. We should be loyal to the purpose of the organization.

What should be done? Here I can only draw upon my own experience. When I came to Washington at the beginning of World War II, my job was to run the electrical section of the Bureau of Ships. Our object was to develop and supply electrical equipment for the Fleet. I found that one man was in charge of design, another took care of production, a third handled maintenance, while a fourth dealt with fiscal matters. This was the way the entire Bureau operated. But it didn’t make sense to me. Design problems showed up in production, production errors showed up in maintenance, and financial matters reached into all areas. I changed the system. I made one man responsible for his piece of equipment—for design, production, maintenance, and contracts. If anything went wrong, I knew exactly where to look. I run my organization today upon the same principle. Our nuclear ships have to work. We have developed the technical knowledge to see that they do. We know that our responsibility extends for the life of the ship—from womb to tomb.

Reform of an institution rarely comes from within. Inertia and resistance are too strong from those who shelter behind the ramparts of custom or find comfort from the soothing narcotic of ritual. Occasionally the defense against new ideas takes strange forms. In 1897, Theodore Roosevelt was chairman of a board set up to reduce the number of senior line officers—a problem that is with us today, too. Promotion had been so slow that the upper ranks were filled with men who arrived too late in their life to learn how to exercise responsibility. A few officers on the board seriously proposed that the reduction be made by a system of chance—a sort of lottery—so that the choice of officers to be retired would be made “without the intervention of human intelligence.” Roosevelt tossed the suggestion aside, for he and others saw that in this method the good officer was as liable to retirement as the poor one. He observed that intelligent men can make mistakes, but surely intelligence is better than blind chance.

Nearly all decisions in the Navy today deal with engineering problems. Technology will not stand still. The penalty for technological surprise can be enormous, even fatal. To avoid getting caught, we must know where the responsibility lies for the quality of our ships and the readiness of our Navy for war. We should return to the bilinear system, in which the technical bureaus reported directly to the Secretary of the Navy. They should no longer report through the Chief of Naval Material to the Chief of Naval Operations. The entire office of the Chief of Naval Material with its huge staff should be recognized as the huge burden it is, and disbanded. Not only would this step relieve those engaged in technical work from unnecessary meetings and paperwork, it would allow the Chief of Naval Operations to cut back on the size of his office. He could then face his primary job: seeing to it that the Navy is ready for war.

The principle behind these actions is that line officers must be taken out of technical positions they are not qualified to hold. The line officer has become an aristocrat. If an aristocracy fills a need in society, it has a valid place. But if it arrogates to itself privileges without responsibilities; if it assumes responsibilities without the necessary qualifications; then an aristocracy is dangerous, not just to itself, but to the society of which it is a part. The aimless way in which the line officers have taken over engineering in the Navy in the last ten years has just about destroyed the engineering capacity of the Navy.

Members of the inner circle of the naval aristocracy have often been rewarded by receiving choice assignments no matter what their experience, or lack of it. The situation is similar to placing favorites and members of the nobility in command of armies, or to Pope Alexander VI making his son Caesar Borgia a Cardinal at seventeen.

Today, many of our naval leaders are actually “cheerleaders,” making heroic attempts to keep the Navy together with endless exhortations and lectures on the value of leadership. Yet they, themselves, are not knowledgeable enough to instruct or to see that the work has been done properly. What we must recognize is that the purpose of the Navy is to defend the country, not to provide a place for comfortable careers. Because our officers are the cutting edge of our military strength, we can make no compromise with their ability.

After Pearl Harbor, President Roosevelt sent for Admiral King. Supposedly King remarked: “When they get into a war, they send for the sons of bitches.” Whether King used these exact words or not, it is their spirit—the determination to cut through difficulties to get the job done—that is important.

The line officer has a professional responsibility to learn how to operate his ship and his fleet. From his experience, he should be able to say what kinds of ships the Navy needs to meet its obligations.

Translating those requirements into operational hardware is the job of the engineering officers and the civilian engineers. These men must be forced to learn their job and assume responsibility for their work. To do this requires long-term assignments. We can no longer permit officers to hold their position for a short time before moving on to their next job. The headquarters organization responsible for the design and construction of ships should be reestablished as a technical organization with its engineers returned to positions requiring them to be responsible for the technical state of affairs instead of being field consultants. As the Navy gains technical competence, it can build up its in-house technical capability, and demand high quality work at reasonable cost from the industrial contractors.

I do not underestimate the difficulties. It demands a clear recognition of purpose. It demands a leadership that knows that its main job is to train and educate officers and men to meet the highest standards at sea and ashore.

To a large extent, the Navy reflects the Department of Defense. Here, too, we are overwhelmed with a suffocating organization. In 1969, the Secretary of Defense asked a leading executive from private industry to serve as chairman of a committee to investigate the Department. Based on the work of his committee, the chairman wrote: “The Defense Department is the single most wasteful, incompetent, overstaffed department in the Government. It consists largely of paper-shufflers and memo-writers.” He was right. As was to be expected, the recommendations of this board—like its innumerable predecessors—were not taken seriously. Boards and commissions are useless because they can only suggest. Frequently they are set up just to quiet criticism by showing that “action” is being taken. The government is littered with reports of boards and committees which have never been acted on.

Changes can only be made by those who are responsible and act responsibly. To cut through the thick underbrush of the paper jungle, the Defense Department in the 1960’s tried systems analysis, program management, and cost effectiveness. McNamara and his “whiz kids,” with their cost analyses and computer methods, “managed” us into the situation where we lost the lead we had in nuclear submarines. Had not Congress intervened at the last moment, we would have stopped nuclear submarine construction almost entirely. Even worse, these systems analysts recommended that we sink ten of our Polaris submarines as a cost-saving measure.

If at times the Navy Department has difficulty in fending off such proposals, one reason is that the Secretary of the Navy does not hold the position of esteem and importance he once possessed. No longer a member of the President’s Cabinet, he is merely one of three service Secretaries who report to the Secretary of Defense.

Today we have new leadership in the Navy and the Department of Defense. I hope these men will give serious thought to reestablishing engineering competence in the Navy. I spoke earlier that we had misread our naval past. I study naval history from the perspective of an officer who is interested in the development of his profession. To me, most of these histories are seriously flawed. With a few notable exceptions, they are written by the victors to hail their own achievements. It is true in any walk of life that past success can engender a dangerous confidence and complacency that can lead to future defeat. In the glow of victory, all error is forgotten.

Recognizing the uncertainty of tomorrow is an important attribute of leadership. But a leader is acting in his highest capacity when he recognizes that his primary function is to train and educate. Naval officers cannot exercise true leadership if they lack the sense of purpose that comes from competence. No classroom courses and no books on leadership can take its place. There is no broad and easy highway to leadership, but only the long road of experience gained through hard and unremitting work at one’s career.

When I am told that I should not attack any of the policies of the Navy Department, it is the same as saying that a son should not warn his mother of a cliff until she has fallen over it. Perhaps, in the end, the facts of life, like a sheepdog with an awkward flock, will finally nudge the Navy toward common sense. But I doubt it. Had I refrained from attacking the policies of the Navy Department over the past 25 years and not gone to Congress and the Atomic Energy Commission, we probably would not now have our nuclear Navy which is a prime factor in keeping war from this country.

Like the philosopher who came to the ancient city, I know that reform means progress, and progress means strife. Where there is no friction, there is no motion. It has always been this way. We must ever seek the purpose of our lives. We must not give in to despair over the state of our technological competence as it is today. The danger lies in the future; it can be averted if we will but act.

It is not the duty of the critic to become responsible for correcting the deficiency he has found. This argument is frequently used to prevent the critic from pointing out what is wrong. When Eurystheus discovered that the Augean stables were dirty, was he then obligated to clean them? Has not the cruiser on the scouting line performed its duty when it reports the presence of the enemy fleet?

Unpleasant facts are unwelcome and no one builds statues to critics. But today we are not quite as impatient of a critic as the ancient Locrians. These people gave freedom of speech to all citizens. At public meetings anyone could stand up and argue for changes in law or custom, on one condition. A rope was placed around his neck before he began to speak and, if what he said did not meet with public approval, he was forthwith hanged. That, no doubt, prevented disturbing the even tenor of familiar customs and ways of life. I have encountered some in the Navy who look with nostalgia on this ancient custom.

But we must face the stark fact that an uncriticized society cannot long endure.





TEN: ADMINISTERING A LARGE MILITARY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT[1]





This chapter was initially given as a speech at the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School on March 16, 1954—about 9 months after the Mark I’s simulated transatlantic voyage and 9 months before the USS Nautilus was launched. It is an early description of the Naval Reactors Program that Admiral Rickover created to develop and build the USS Nautilus and the USS Seawolf, and it represents the principles he used to ensure that engineering work was done professionally within an organization.





During the past fifteen years I have addressed the students of the Postgraduate School at Annapolis on a number of occasions. My talks have all been confined to technical matters, and they have not required extensive preparation, because I was talking about matters familiar to me, and which dealt with things, with engineering facts, which I could discuss with some facility and with objectivity.

But when one talks about how a job is done, he necessarily talks about people, and not about things. He enters the realm of the subjective. His thoughts and his actions stem from his personality, from his own experience, and from his own view of things. The temptation is strong to talk in generalities, to define accomplishment in terms of standards or organization; or to stress the oft-repeated qualities of leadership, such as intelligence, wisdom, honesty, virtue, tact, grace, aggressiveness, humility, courage, tenacity, and so on—in other words to describe not a man but who possesses the attributes of a God.

In my younger days I was bothered by these criteria. Somehow, things just didn’t work out the way the books on administration and on leadership said they should, and I early became aware that I could never qualify as a leader, if it were really necessary that I possess the twenty or so qualities most books or articles on leadership claimed to be necessary. So far, I have found no one in the Navy or in industry who possesses more than a few of these qualities, and so I have regretfully come to the conclusion that the only person who ever possessed all of them died some 1900 years ago.

I mention this because the quest for the impossible may so condition us as to prevent us from accomplishing the possible.

Politics has been defined as the art of the possible. In my opinion, politicians are those men who more face up to the realities of the world and of mankind, than any other groups of citizens. A politician must get things done, or he loses office.

I commend to you the political approach towards accomplishing objectives. One thing that can be said for it is that it works. A very eminent Secretary of the Navy, Mr. Forrestal, once said: “Government without politics is like conception without sex.” And it will probably surprise you to know that even George Washington practiced politics in the appointment and promotion of officers when he considered it necessary to do so for the public good. He once wrote: “But if officers will not see into the political motives by which I am sometimes governed in my appointments, and which the good of the common cause renders indispensably necessary, it is unfortunate; but it cannot, because it ought not, divert me from the practice of a duty, which I think promotes the interests of the United States, and is consistent with the view of that power under which I act.”

The development of naval nuclear propulsion plants is a good example of how one goes about getting a job done. It is a good subject to study for methods, because it involves not only the accomplishment of a recognized difficult technical operation, in which expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars is necessary, but also because it involves the intimate working together of two large governmental organizations, the Navy on the one hand, and a civilian organization, the Atomic Energy Commission, on the other. It has involved the establishment of procedures and ways of doing government business for which there was no precedent, and which I believe will be necessary in future for similar large projects.

The first step toward accomplishing anything is to have a goal. Goals are set by people and not by organizations. At some point, sooner or later, organizations lend their names to a project, but the concept and the initial work is always started by an individual. This is difficult for military people to comprehend, because they are used to operating under a relatively rigid impersonal system. Official letters, for example, are written in the third person; the appearance is that a Bureau or an Office does something. It should be obvious that Bureaus and Offices are inanimate, and therefore cannot generate ideas or do things.

Early in 1946 the Manhattan District decided to build an atomic power pile to demonstrate peaceful application of atomic power. Industry, as well as the Army, Navy and Air Corps, were invited to participate in the technical work at Oak Ridge. Several officers and civilians were sent by the Navy. I was the senior one of the group. All of the naval officers and the civilian engineers were sent as individuals to be assigned by the Manhattan District as they considered necessary. At Oak Ridge the Navy people were assigned to various disconnected activities and no serious thought given to their education. I soon realized that unless the Navy people were organized into a unit and their training and education systematized we would complete our year’s stay at Oak Ridge and still not be prepared to commence work on an atomic propulsion plant. Since the Bureau of Ships was in no position formally to request such organization, I established personal relations with the military and scientific people at Oak Ridge, and soon all of the Navy people were assigned to me. I arranged for their general education in nuclear matters, and, in addition, assigned each one a specialty in which he was to become proficient. The result was that by the time we left Oak Ridge we had the nucleus of a technical organization.

The preparation and the writing of reports is a tedious and unwelcome job, when one is already devoting most of his time to study. But I knew that it was important that the Chief of the Bureau understand what we were doing. So I compiled a list of reports which were to be prepared during the year and assigned them to individuals to prepare. The result was that once every two weeks a report covering a specific technical subject was sent out. These reports served two valuable purposes; they forced the students to learn the specialized subject, and at the same time they served to educate the leading people in the Bureau of the actual status of nuclear power.

The next step was to select a suitable naval vessel, and a suitable reactor to develop. After considerable discussion we agreed that the submarine offered the greatest promise, and that a thermal neutron, water cooled reactor, the best propulsion plant.

Because we are closely organized and fairly well trained in nuclear technology in accordance with what was known at the time, we were in a position to take advantage of any opportunity which might arise. Such an opportunity soon came.

Because work on the power pile at Oak Ridge did not pan out well, the Atomic Energy Commission, which had replaced the Manhattan District, decided to cancel the project. Because we were on the spot, because we were organized as a group and knew what we wanted, we were able, without Washington authorities realizing it, to divert the people and the effort at Oak Ridge to study a submarine pile.

Shortly after this we all returned to Washington. The naval group was broken up and assigned to different duties. Nevertheless I continued in my effort to achieve nuclear propulsion for a submarine. There was now a group of scientists and engineers studying the problem at Oak Ridge, but no authorization for the work, and no requirement for a nuclear submarine by the Navy. Obviously it was only a matter of a short time before the work would be terminated, unless the Navy itself decided it wanted an atomic submarine and succeeded in convincing the Atomic Energy Commission that it was important.

So the next step was to obtain a “Hunting License.” This is a piece of paper which authorizes one to do a certain thing. It is frequently called a directive, or some such descriptive term. One must have such a piece of paper as a “Hunting License” in Government, if he is to get anything done.

Contrary to what most naval officers believe, particularly those who have not had duty in Washington, policy letters and other important documents signed by the Secretary of the Navy or by the Chief of Naval Operations are not prepared by them, but by the particular individual who wants the job done. It is he who must fight the policy letter through the various layers before it reaches the Chief of Naval Operations or the Secretary of the Navy.

This requires tenacity and considerable patience, because the Navy Department is like an automobile with six individual brakes; the car cannot start until all six passengers agree to release their brake. Many individuals in a large organization have the power to say “No”—and many projects are stopped because the originator meets discouragement after discouragement and finally says “what the hell,” or else is transferred to other duty.

Therefore, one must have a saleable item which appeals to a large group of people—preferably to those in responsible positions. As a rule, the higher people are in an organization, the more receptive they are to new ideas, and the problem is how to get to those high people. This requires a thorough knowledge of the organization, of the mental attitude of those who might approve and those who might disapprove. There are many who will disapprove. They are like onlookers in a struggle in which they have no personal stake. They are adept at the etiquettes of organization, but without experience in doing things. They must be by-passed.

In this process of obtaining the “Hunting License,” as well as obtaining approval of any other important idea, the method of presentation is important. If you have a proposal with five points, for example, don’t try to sell all five at one time. Likewise don’t try to sell 5 points simultaneously to a group of 5 people. If one of the 5 objects to one of the proposals, he will vote against your entire package. If three of the 5 each object to one of the proposals, then your whole package is lost. But if you only present one proposal at a time, you can stand to have two people vote against you, and still win out.

It is also well to remember that many important people fail to become interested in various projects, not because they lack interest, but because they lack time. Therefore, you must so plan that your own project receives the attention of these people. Having obtained the “Hunting License” you must set about implementing it.

“Hunting Licenses” are not too difficult to obtain. The possession of a license is no guarantee of success. There are generally more hunting licenses issued than there are deer to be hunted. Only the persistent hunter ever gets a deer. First the hunter must get a gun; this is vulgarly known in government as “money”—and without money nothing but goodwill can be obtained.

It takes considerable thought, work and time to obtain the funds necessary to carry on a large project. But since nothing can be done without money, this necessarily takes priority over all other matters. In the Defense Establishment there are about 8 offices we must go through before the case is presented to the Bureau of the Budget. And any one of these can deny the funds or decrease the amount.

In the AEC it is much less difficult. The case is presented to the five Commissioners, and, if they approve, it goes directly to the Bureau of the Budget.

It is extremely fortunate that in the early years of our project we were financed almost entirely by the AEC. To have had to go through the Navy procedures in those days, and to convince the many people who possessed veto power—might have resulted in considerable delay in getting started. In the beginning we obtained nearly all our funds from the AEC. Gradually the Navy portion has been increasing, until now the AEC supplied about 75% of the research and development funds, and the Navy about 25%. The ability to draw on funds from two different agencies is a very valuable one. When the rules of one do not permit certain work to be done, the rules of the other generally do.

The AEC, by law, controls all atomic energy work; no one, including the Navy, can engage in this work unless authorized by the AEC. It became obvious to me from the first, that if we were to play an active and significant role in developing naval atomic propulsion plants, we had to become established as an integral part of the AEC. After about one year of politicking I was finally ordered to duty in the AEC as Chief of the Naval Reactors Branch. At the same time I was assigned additional duty as Head of the Nuclear Power Division of the Bureau of Ships. Thus, one person, one group of people, acted for both the AEC and the Navy. By being part of the AEC we achieved a powerful position to assist in formulating policy and in obtaining money. We have offices in the AEC and in the Navy. Some of our officers are assigned to the AEC, some to the Navy. The same applies to civilian personnel. We use our officers, our engineers, our clerical help, interchangeably—just as we mix our money.

As far as I know this was the first instance in government where a single group of people acted in a line capacity for both a military agency and a civilian agency. In modern war the military cannot stand alone. The armed forces are but the cutting edge of a sword; the civilian effort, including industry, government and national institutions and culture, are the heft of the sword which backs up the military.

Therefore it is likely that this type of organization will be followed in the future. Our way of doing business is known and approved by the Bureau of the Budget and by the appropriate Congressional Committees.

In consequence of our being a literal part of the AEC we have been able to have the two most competent AEC reactor laboratories, the Bettis Lab at Pittsburgh operated by Westinghouse Electric Corporation, and the KAPL Lab near Schenectady operated by General Electric, devoted almost entirely to naval atomic power plants. Without the use of these labs and the many hundreds of experienced reactor scientists and engineers it would not have been possible to make the progress we have made.

Our single group, operating for the two agencies, renders it possible to make decisions quickly and with a minimum of red tape. We deal directly with laboratories, with manufacturers and with shipbuilders. Nearly all actions are taken by long distance telephone; we have special leased wires for our projects—and decisions can be confirmed later by letter.

An example of how we act rapidly is the manner in which we incorporate into the Nautilus such changes as have been found to be necessary as the result of operating experience on the submarine prototype at Arco. We have a Change Board consisting of three members, one from my organization, one from Westinghouse and one from Electric Boat. The three people meet once every two weeks, go over recommended changes and make final decisions on the spot, and that same day.

People:

Everything in the world is done through people. If the proper people are obtained there is no other problem. It is a fallacy to believe that the head of an organization can delegate this responsibility to an employment manager or to a personnel manager. This may be possible in the case of clerical help, but is certainly not the case for officers and engineers.

The problem then becomes one of recruiting people who are more competent, or potentially more competent, than the head of the organization. This is the single most important responsibility of the administrator, and he cannot delegate it. The knowledge required for proper selection of people is knowledge of the deepest kind and which demands most of us. Knowledge of things or of logical propositions is much easier to acquire than knowledge of persons.

Officer Selection:

We select between 4 and 6 officers each year and send them to MIT for a special course of 1 year in nuclear engineering. We have found from considerable experience that service records are only about 46% to 50% effective in judging an officer—because the records, as a rule, do not show motivation. An officer may have outstanding fitness reports, but not necessarily be fitted for scientific or technical work, or have the outlook which is essential to accomplish difficult tasks. Fitness reports are generally based on how well an officer does the particular job assigned to him. But they do not usually indicate that he is earnest in preparing himself for other more difficult or complex duties—in short that he has the necessary high degree of motivation for improving himself professionally. And the simple reason fitness reports do not show this is because few officers are so motivated.

Our practice is to select the most promising applicants, and have them come to Washington to be interviewed by a number of our people. For example, we recently selected 5 officers of 17 who came to Washington. The 17 had what appeared to be the best records of about 40 who applied.

What I look for in an officer is a high degree of intelligence, enthusiasm, willingness to accept responsibility, and the ability to carry through—to get things done on his own, and despite obstacles. Our work is so new, and so vast in its scope; it is increasing so rapidly that we must have people who are capable of dedicating themselves to a cause without regard to the effort or the hours necessary.

We attempt to instill the idea of total responsibility in each individual— that he is personally responsible, not only for his own specific part of the job, but for everything we do. A true sense of responsibility once instilled in the individuals of an organization will, in a short time, make that organization stand out from its competitors to an extent impossible to achieve by mere technical or professional superiority.

This system has been in operation for 7 years; during this time I have never accepted an officer without an interview. That batting average based on performance is about 60%. This is much greater than is usually found in industry for similar important jobs. 25% would be considered very good. The younger the officer, the greater the chance he will make good. The older officers are, as a rule, already too much set in their habits of thought, and have become indoctrinated in routine ways of doing things. They are more likely to be unable to accept new outlooks and new ways.

Be the man ever so brilliant, if his prejudices have cast his thinking in a certain mold, so that he will not accept observations which are not in line with his restricted thinking, a chance nugget of an idea will remain as clay in his sight, and he will never discover its true value.

One of the characteristics of engineers which I have frequently observed, and which must be guarded against, is the search for exact answers, and the feeling of frustration if the exact answer is not forthcoming. This probably stems from the many years of high school and college training where the answer is always to be found in the back of the book, and the feeling of elation which comes when, after trying several solutions, and looking furtively at the answer, the latest trial finally works.

Unfortunately, in real life there are no exact or final answers. In a job which must go ahead at a rapid pace we cannot withhold judgment “until all the facts are in.” Rarely is all the evidence at hand. Decisions must be made, and actions taken, before complete knowledge can be acquired.

I have for some time thought that a few of our present day ills stem from this childish faith in the existence of perfect answers. It requires a degree of maturity to realize that all solutions are partial ones.

When the researches of the Pythagoreans brought them face to face with irrational numbers, they were overwhelmed by the discovery. It contradicted the fundamental tenet of their philosophy that everything is rational.

This can be summed up by saying that regularity is abnormal, and that the irregular is always more common than the regular.

In selecting civilian engineers I have come to the conclusion, after many years of experience, that I can do better by employing young men just out of college, and training them myself, than by hiring so-called experienced engineers who already know all the answers. Because of the interest in nuclear power I am able to employ the outstanding graduates of technical colleges. A number of us spend on the average a total of about 100 hours of interviewing for each young graduate finally selected. We consider this the single most important duty we have.

We select about 5 young graduates each year and send them to the Oak Ridge School of Reactor Technology for one year. Upon their return to us they are given just as much responsibility as they are able to handle. There is no limit to what they are allowed to do—as long as they do it well. It is entirely up to them. The job is so vast technically, and there are so many unsolved problems, that it is like a bottomless pit.

The training of our people goes on forever. Much of my time and that of my leading people is spent in personally pointing out errors. One thing that has impressed me about our Naval Service is the infrequency with which officers I worked for took time personally to explain mistakes to me. I have always considered this a primary part of my duty—because it is the best way of transmitting what we know to those who follow us and who will have to assume our responsibilities.

This day-to-day personal attention is the essence of training. It is generally unpleasant, at the time, to the one who is being taught, because few people are able to accept criticism impersonally. And yet it is essential that the one who is being taught recognize that criticism is impersonal—that the criticism is of the act, or of a thing, and not of the person. This is a neverending job, but it more than pays off. Unless one continually does this, unless he constantly trains others to do his work, he becomes completely limited and circumscribed.

The same mistake may have to be pointed out to the same individual 10 or 11 times, but if the lesson is learned the 11th time—that area of work can be relinquished forever—and one is free to go on to other things. In an organization where the work is expanding rapidly this procedure is essential. If an individual shows he cannot learn—if he cannot grasp new ideas, it is best to leave him go without too much delay. It is a truism that young men do not show greater promise as they grow older; therefore one will be disappointed if, after a short trial, he expects radical improvement.

A man, by working 24 hours a day, could multiply himself 3 times. To multiply himself more than 3 times the only resource is to train others to take over some of his work.

Some of the ideas I try to get across to the people who work with me are the following:

More than ambition, more than ability, it is rules that limit contribution; rules are the lowest common denominator of human behavior. They are a substitute for rational thought.

Sit down before fact with an open mind. Be prepared to give up every preconceived notion. Follow humbly wherever and to whatever abyss Nature leads or you learn nothing. Don’t push out figures when the facts are going in the opposite direction.

Free discussion requires an atmosphere unembarrassed by any suggestion of authority or even respect. If a subordinate always agrees with his superior he is a useless part of the organization. In this connection there is the story of Admiral Sims when he was on duty in London during World War I. He called a conscientious hardworking officer in to him to explain why he was dissatisfied with the officer’s work. The officer blushed and stammered when Sims pointed out that in all the time they had been together the officer had never once disagreed with Sims.

All men are by nature conservative but conservatism in the military profession is a source of danger to the country. One must be ready to change his line sharply and suddenly, with no concern for the prejudices and memories of what was yesterday. To rest upon a formula is a slumber that, prolonged, means death.

Success teaches us nothing; only failure teaches.

Do not regard loyalty as a personal matter. A greater loyalty is one to the Navy or to the Country. When you know you are absolutely right, and when you are unable to do anything about it, complete military subordination to rules becomes a form of cowardice.

To doubt one’s own first principles is the mark of a civilized man. Don’t defend past actions; what is right today may be wrong tomorrow. Don’t be consistent; consistency is the refuge of fools.

Thoughts arising from “practical” experience may be a bridle or a spur.

Optimism and stupidity are nearly synonymous.

Avoid over-coordination. We have all observed month-long delay caused by an effort to bring all activities into complete agreement with a proposed policy or procedure. While the coordinating machinery is slowly grinding away, the original purpose is often lost, the essence of the proposal is being worn down, as the persons most concerned impatiently await the decision. This process has been aptly called “coordinating to death.”



A system under which it takes three men to check what one is doing is not control; it is systematic strangulation.





TECHNICAL COMPETENCE

In 1945, after the defeat of Germany we sent technical missions to Europe to learn what we could of the enemy war effort. Col. Leslie Simion who was at the U.S. Army Aberdeen Proving Grounds during the war was one of those sent to study the German technology effort. He reported that the German Air Force had been far superior to the German Army and Navy in science and in technology because the German Air Force had available at their headquarters’ organization people who were equally competent as those in industry with whom they had to deal. As a result, it is safe to say that, considering the effort required and the limitations of men and materials, the German Air Force performed the outstanding development job in aircraft. The German Army and Navy on the other hand relied almost entirely on industry itself to do the job—and the result was a much poorer performance.

The lesson from this is that a military agency which aspires to do a large development job, and rapidly, must have at its headquarters scientists and engineers just as competent as those who are doing the work in the field. Otherwise, the headquarters is at the mercy of the field and becomes essentially an agency for merely supplying the necessary funds and rubber stamping the technical decisions.

Technical decisions in the nuclear power game are made jointly by the members of my organization and by those in the field. There has never yet been an instance where we have had to order anything to be done. We argue things out, and finally a common decision is reached.

The relations we maintain with the laboratories and the many industrial organizations with whom we work is one of complete informality. In dealing with industry one must always bear in mind that getting along well is a give and take proposition. One cannot constantly chide a contractor in small matters, and then expect him to meet sudden large demands with enthusiasm. The contractor must be given the feeling he “belongs,” that he is an equal member of a team, and he will be treated fairly. As far as I personally am concerned, I consider that I am just as responsible for the welfare and training of the men and women of the organizations which do work for us as I am for those in my own organization.





RESPONSIBILITY

One of the major difficulties in getting things done in a large organization is the fact that it is practically impossible to pin-point responsibility. A Bureau or an Office can’t be made responsible because, as I said before, they are inanimate and therefore are incapable of perception or of feeling. Limited tours of duty of two or three years in positions of responsibility accentuate this situation.

I have attempted to solve this problem of responsibility by assigning to each project an officer whom I hold personally responsible to me for the entire project. It is up to him to use whatever means he has to in order to get it done. For example, there is a project officer for the Nautilus, one for the Seawolf, one for the Central Station Nuclear Power Plant, and so on. These officers are kept on duty for 5, 6, or 7 years—as long as necessary. In this way I achieve permanence and responsibility. It is futile to imagine that an individual can take charge of a highly technical project, stay two or three years and then leave, and contribute anything. If this were true then the system used by American industry is wrong. With the geometrical advance in science and in engineering it behooves us, the military, to recognize that an officer can no longer be master of many skills, and that a considerable period of learning and of training is essential if one is to be more than a pure administrator. And I submit there is no such thing as a pure administrator. A man must have technical competence in what he is administering; this is the only way he can assume true leadership and make real contributions.





ADMINISTRATION

The administration of a complex development program cannot follow any rule book. The fact that it is development at once defines it as a search or a groping for knowledge which is beyond our horizons. If known rules or known technology would serve to solve the problem—it would no longer, by definition, be developmental.

Therefore, the true test of an administrator for developmental or new work is his ability to concert and release the energies of those who work with him. Followed faithfully, the strict organizational approach, with its faith in channels, job descriptions and organizational charts, chokes vitality, stifles imagination and deadens creativity. It plays safe with administration and, while it no doubt insures against abysmal failure, it also insures against brilliant success.

The technique we use might be called “indefinite jurisdiction,” but it often provides a testing of initiative, competence, and imagination which produces far better results than playing safe by the book.

I could go on at length on a subject of this kind. By this time all of you should have recognized that I am talking from the viewpoint of one who is enthusiastic about his own work.

A fitting close to this talk is the following extract from a letter I recently received from an executive of one of our large industrial organizations.

“What I find most exciting is that your job establishes a new concept in industrial operations, a concept of an operation which is neither straight technology nor scientific research, but a combination of both. It seems to me this concept is going to set the pattern of the things to come, since the day of the scientist in his ivory tower on the one hand, and an industrial operation exploiting ‘practical’ inventions on the other hand, is over.

Both technology and science are rapidly becoming so complex that no one can predict what will be ‘practical,’ and one scientific discovery requires many others before it can be made to serve humanity.

Consequently a successful industrial executive of tomorrow will be one who can make scientists and engineers work side by side, in harmony, as one team—one who will have the practical judgment and the organizing ability to interpret and handle creative temperaments.”





ELEVEN: CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONYON REACTOR SAFETY[1]





This chapter is an example of the type of congressional testimony for which Rickover was famous. The date of this testimony (June 14, 1961) was approximately six months after the accident at the Army’s SL-1 reactor site in Arco, Idaho, that killed three military personnel. One objective of Congress in this session was to understand Rickover’s thoughts on the successful safety record of the Naval Reactors program, and their questioning afforded him the opportunity to provide one of his most famous quotes on personal responsibility and its role in ensuring reactor safety.





Representative Price: The next witness will be Admiral Rickover. Admiral, we are always glad to have you before our committee. We value your testimony at all times.

Admiral Rickover: Thank you, sir.

Representative Price: Sir, will you proceed with any statement that you care to make on this subject of reactor safety.

Admiral Rickover: I have no prepared statement, Mr. Chairman. I believe you know that over a period of many years the Naval Reactors Branch has had an in house headquarters organization responsible for the design and development of reactors, the construction of the nuclear power plants that contain the reactors, the training of officers and men, and for the constant observance of all the major and minor technical details that occur. We are involved in these details and we follow them thoroughly on a day-byday basis. This is the way we make sure that our reactors are designed and operating properly.

Representative Price: How many nuclear reactors have been built under your supervision and how many of these are in operation now?

Admiral Rickover: We now have 21—we will have, by Sunday, 21 submarines in operation. We have actually operated, counting the initial and the replacement cores, 44 power reactors. I believe this is probably more than all other power reactors in the world put together.

Representative Price: You do not know of any other group that has built more reactors than the Naval Reactors group?

Admiral Rickover: I doubt there is, sir.

Representative Van Zandt: Did you say 21 submarines on Sunday?

Admiral Rickover: Yes. We are going out on trials of the Ethan Allen, our sixth Polaris submarine, early Sunday morning.

Representative Van Zandt: Overall, 44 reactors?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir. That includes the nuclear cores that have been replaced; it includes the eight cores in the aircraft carrier, the two in the cruiser and the Shippingport reactor. So that I have been responsible for a total of 44 nuclear power reactors.

Representative Van Zandt: From a time standpoint, how far back does this take you?

Admiral Rickover: It goes back to May 31, 1953, when the first reactor core of the Nautilus prototype started operating at Arco, Idaho.

Representative Van Zandt: The 44 reactors that you mention are both land based and sea based?

Admiral Rickover: They are land based and seagoing, with the great majority being seagoing.

Representative Van Zandt: How many people would you say have been employed in the effort, both civilian and military-wise?

Admiral Rickover: I suppose if you took into account the manufacturing industries there would be about 100,000 people. This is a rough figure, Mr. Van Zandt.

Representative Van Zandt: To the best of your knowledge, without having to get records, have you had any accidents?

Admiral Rickover: No, sir; fortunately we have had no accidents.

Representative Van Zandt: Have you had any personnel that absorbed any unusual dose of radiation?

Admiral Rickover: No, sir; we have had none.

Representative Van Zandt: You credit this, of course, to the reply that you made to Mr. Price a moment ago about the type of organization that you maintain day in and day out for the purpose of safety?

Admiral Rickover: Plus the fact that I have found favor with this committee, with the Atomic Energy Commission, and in the eyes of the Lord.

Representative Van Zandt: Thank you for including us.

Representative Price: The members of the House are going to have to leave for a moment to answer the rollcall in the House, but Senator Jackson will continue the hearing.

(Senator Jackson presiding)

Senator Jackson: Admiral Rickover, you have maintained an outstanding safety record. I wonder if you would indicate some of the important factors that make this possible.

Admiral Rickover: The first factor is to have people in charge who are thoroughly competent in the design and operation of reactors, both the scientific and engineering aspects—people who follow the work every minute of the day and night and do not depend on anyone else to do this for them. The second factor is the acceptance of personal responsibility. Without acceptance—unlimited acceptance—of complete responsibility by the individual you cannot avoid ultimately having accidents.

Senator Jackson: Of course, the selection of people is very vital.

Admiral Rickover: Yes, but that is a part of the responsibility, Senator Jackson. If you feel yourself to be personally responsible for everything that happens, then, to carry out your responsibility you must select and train the people and check on the operation of the ships. You must check on the design, make sure of the excellence of the laboratories doing the work, see to it that the industrial organizations manufacturing the individual items are doing their job right, prepare new specifications as necessary. You must be personally and emotionally involved in every single feature of the program. Otherwise, you will inevitably run into trouble.

Senator Jackson: Referring to Navy reactors, who is responsible now?

Admiral Rickover: I am surprised you ask me such a question, sir.

Senator Jackson: I wanted it for the record. I think that we know.

Admiral Rickover: I am responsible, of course.

Mr. Ramey: Which hat are you wearing?

Admiral Rickover: I don’t know. I am not wearing any hat right now. I never know which hat I am wearing. I understand there are job descriptions in the Navy and in the AEC which say what I am supposed to do, but I have been too busy to read them. I only know that I am responsible. That’s enough.

Senator Jackson: Do you do it better without wearing a hat?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir.

Senator Jackson: You have demonstrated, I think, over the years how to wear them and how not to wear them.

Admiral Rickover: I understand the scientists have now computed that 25 percent of the heat escaping from the body is from the head. If I wore a hat it might slow me down.

Representative Van Zandt: Admiral, I have always been amazed at your ability to select military personnel to do the job on the submarines that is necessary. How much training do you give these people before they actually find themselves in a command slot, or even in an organization slot aboard one of these nuclear powered subs?

Admiral Rickover: As you know, I have had quite a problem with the Navy over the last 10 to 12 years in the selection of personnel, particularly officers. But the Navy now agrees that only intelligent people who are dedicated and capable of improving should go into this program.

The Navy permits me to interview every officer who enters the program and to make recommendations to the Chief of Naval Personnel. Those selected, both officers and men, are given an intensive course of training. Six months of this is theoretical and 6 months practical.

Representative Van Zandt: Where does the training take place?

Admiral Rickover: The 6 months theoretical training takes place at New London, Conn., or at Mare Island, Calif. The practical training takes place at the land prototypes. These are located at West Milton, N.Y., where we have the Triton prototype; at Windsor, Conn., where there is the Tullibee prototype; and at Arco, Idaho, where there is an aircraft carrier prototype and the Nautilus prototype. All of the men must learn the theory and the practical details of operating a nuclear power plant.

But the education and training does not stop there, because after they are assigned to a ship they must continue to learn. Even after he is on a ship he must remain qualified or he will be detached. We have adopted a new practice for ships completing at a shipyard where, instead of the shipyard or Navy yard employees testing the propulsion plants, getting them ready to go to sea and operating the plants on sea trials, we have that done by the officers and crew. This is different than the practice on other naval ships where the yard personnel do all the testing and conduct the sea trials.

About a month before a reactor is ready to go critical, a group of my senior people and I spend 2 days examining the officers and men in the engineering department—about half the crew—to ascertain whether they are fully qualified. This examination is very strict. If the crew is found to be qualified, they are authorized to bring the reactor critical. If we find them not qualified, we indicate the areas of weakness and the additional work they must do, and we reexamine them later.

On top of this I have been in charge of the first sea trials of every nuclear ship. Senior members of the Naval Reactors Branch and I are responsible for conducting the propulsion-plant trials of each ship.

Representative Van Zandt: What percentage do you wash out?

Admiral Rickover: About 25 percent of even the highly selected people fail during our training course. Training is a most important part of our program, because unless a man has the mental capacity to learn modern technology and to understand the dangers inherent in radiation he cannot do his job adequately. This is a hard lesson for many to learn because nuclear power, as does every new development, brings its attendant train of problems. This must be recognized and taken into account by all in authority.

Senator Jackson: While on the subject of training, Admiral Rickover, I wonder if you might describe the conditions precedent to the construction of a nuclear-powered ship, training, development and so on that takes place, and what you are doing about it.

Admiral Rickover: That is a timely question, sir, because the Navy is now in the process of training two new yards: the Charleston Navy Yard and the Puget Sound Navy Yard. The latter should be of particular interest to you.

Senator Jackson: As you know, Admiral Rickover, I have taken an interest in this for over a number of years, and I have previously written to the Secretary of the Navy asking Puget Sound Navy Yard be considered.

Admiral Rickover: May I briefly describe the process we go through in training a new yard?

Senator Jackson: Yes.

Admiral Rickover: It so happens I discussed this very subject with Admiral Dolan, commander of the Puget Sound Navy Yard, this morning. At my request he is making a survey to find the best people in the yard. He and his production and planning officers will personally interview the engineers and select about 30 or 40 of the very best ones. Then I will have senior members of my organization visit the yard and personally interview each of these engineers to decide whether they are capable of being trained for nuclear power work. Some of these selected will be trained at other yards where nuclear ships are being built; they will become the nucleus of the nuclear power organization at the Puget Sound yard.

Senator Jackson: When do you plan to do this out there?

Admiral Rickover: I expect to be at Puget Sound the end of this month.

Senator Jackson: Around the 30th?

Admiral Rickover: Somewhere around there.

Senator Jackson: 29th or 30th?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, are you going to be out there, sir?

Senator Jackson: You never know.

Admiral Rickover: We will also have to train several hundred of the yard workman in special welding techniques and in radiological safety. This will be part of setting up the nuclear organization.

Senator Jackson: How many key engineers do you have to train to start with?

Admiral Rickover: We will train somewhere between 30 and 50 key engineers.

Senator Jackson: And then it will take several hundred.

Admiral Rickover: Several hundred workmen especially trained to do this work; yes, sir.

Senator Jackson: Do you send the key engineers to yards that have had previous experience?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir. Some will be sent to activities such as our nuclear laboratories and yards. Some will be trained locally.

Senator Jackson: Then the workmen will be trained right in the yard?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir. The workmen, with a few exceptions, will be trained in the yard. I will assign an experienced officer from my organization to be in charge of the nuclear work at Puget Sound.

Senator Jackson: I understand that the program you are talking about takes a year and a half.

Admiral Rickover: It takes at least a year and a half for a yard that already has sufficient human potential. If a yard does not have this personnel potential it will take much longer. They will have to acquire people. I know from my own experience that Puget Sound is a good yard. You ought to be proud to come from a State which has such a yard.

Senator Jackson: That is why I wrote the letter to the Secretary of the Navy. It was not because the yard was located in the State. It is one of these outstanding yards. I was glad to have your corroboration of my completely natural interest in this problem.

There is one other matter that I want to inquire about, Admiral Rickover. How do you resolve the Navy’s responsibility for operating nuclear ships with the Atomic Energy Commission’s responsibility which requires that standards and adequate regulations are properly set to protect the public?

Admiral Rickover: The Atomic Energy Commission, as you have just said, sir, is responsible for the overall safety of all nuclear power plants and installations. My primary duty is with the Atomic Energy Commission. There, I am in charge of the Naval Reactors Branch which has to do with the design of nuclear propulsion plants, the nuclear laboratories, the land prototypes, and the training of naval personnel for nuclear duty. I have additional duty in the Navy Department as Assistant Chief of the Bureau of Ships where I am responsible for the construction of the nuclear part of the propulsion plant, and for the testing and operation of the nuclear plants. The Atomic Energy Commission has agreed that the AEC laboratories will supply people to help in this function. Because I head work in the AEC and in the Navy, these two organizations, the AEC and the Navy, are combined in this effort. In this way the work is done without duplication and with minimum cost.

As you know, whenever one of our new types of plants is ready to go critical we notify the Licensing and Regulation Division of the AEC. We also notify the Reactor Safeguards Committee, and we have these two groups evaluate our design and operating procedures. No ship goes to sea without having had such an investigation. They get into such questions as whether a ship can operate out of a particular port, at what power level it can operate in that particular area, and so on.

We go over this in detail with them before each new class of nuclear ship goes into operation. This is a continuing process, and may require several actions by the Reactor Safeguards Committee.

In the case of the Nautilus, we had four separate reviews by the Reactor Safeguards Committee. I think we have had nearly 40 sessions with this committee about various aspects of our reactor plant designs and operations. We keep the committee currently informed of what is going on.

We very much welcome their advice. We have great respect for their abilities. They are frequently hard on us, but then they have a difficult job to do and they have to be tough. We have found they are quite helpful and fair to us.

Senator Jackson: I have one other question in this general area. One of the problems concerning the committee is the pinpointing of responsibility in the event of nuclear accidents. We had one at Arco, the SL-1. How can the Joint Committee ascertain what individual or individuals are responsible for a specific project?

Admiral Rickover: That is very simple. The man who comes up and asks you for money is the one who is responsible.

Senator Jackson: Is he, necessarily? He asks for money but then someone else is operating it and running it.

Admiral Rickover: Someone else is operating it? What does he want, just the glory, then when something goes wrong someone else is responsible?

Senator Jackson: I wanted to give you this opportunity to comment on the problem that we face here in the committee.

Admiral Rickover: I do not believe you face a problem there. I think you are creating a problem for yourselves. The answer is self-evident.

Mr. Ramey: On the question of responsibility for regulations and for operational safety in the Navy, as I recall last year, or the year before, there may have been some problems with respect to more or less standardized Navy safety procedures that were not adapted to the nuclear problem. In other words, there was some inclination in the Navy to look at nuclear safety as a standardized matter.

Admiral Rickover: Mr. Ramey, you know that military people traditionally like to operate their equipment, weapons, and ships in the way they have been used to and without interference from outside. It is very difficult for people who have spent the greater part of their lives in a prescientific age to understand that they are now dealing with a force that must be handled in an entirely different manner than they have been accustomed. This is recognized by the top military and civilian people. It is not thoroughly recognized by others who believe their prerogatives to be invaded when someone suggests to them that if you do such and such a thing you may incur danger. This idea is very difficult to get across. We have been fairly successful in convincing some people of these truths; in some cases we have not. I think if your committee and if the AEC do not constantly follow this matter, the situation will inevitably deteriorate. It is hard to get people to understand that when they deal with radiation they are not dealing with ordinary phenomena which can merely do local, transitory harm.

With radiation you can also do harm to posterity. This is a concept which is difficult for many to understand.

Representative Van Zandt: Admiral, probably the greatest concentration of reactor activity from the standpoint of Naval vessels is at New London and Groton, Conn.

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir.

Representative Van Zandt: In your opinion, do you think that the regulation applied, both civilian and militarywise, is adequate to protect safety of the population in that area?

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir, it is. New London was chosen as a home port for our nuclear submarines. You must remember that a dead reactor, that is, one that is not operating is not dangerous if it is properly designed and maintained. So the fact that you have 5 or 10 reactors in an area, with only 1 or 2 operating, does not mean that you have 5 or 10 potentially dangerous cases.

We have issued specific instructions on the operation and maintenance of our reactors. We have also issued instruction books that have been very carefully prepared by our laboratories and checked by us. The operators are thoroughly instructed and examined. No one is allowed to operate one of our reactors unless he is thoroughly qualified. Also, proper supervision must be present to assure that all specific instructions and procedures are followed.

We have done everything humanly possible to prevent accidents. Furthermore, a Navy order provides that no one unqualified may work on a reactor, nor can any change be made in any reactor without prior official authorization. As you are aware, sir, we train the officers in our schools, except the commanding officers who are trained right in my own headquarters organization. These spend a year with my leading people. We teach them and indoctrinate them in nuclear power as well as in the principles of ship and machinery design. The commanding officers spend a considerable part of their time during this year at a land prototype where they learn to operate the plant. While they are at the prototype, for several weeks at a time, they work 16 hours a day, 7 days a week.

The fact that a nuclear ship may go to sea for 2 months at a time, and be away from the United States, does not in itself relieve me of my responsibility even though an operational commander has charge. I have been responsible for the design of the reactor plant, the training of the crew, the installation and test, the issuance of instructions. So no matter where an accident might happen, I am still personally responsible.

Responsibility is a unique concept; it may only reside and inhere in a single individual. You may share it with others, but your portion is not diminished. You may delegate it, but it is still with you. You may disclaim it, but you cannot divest yourself of it. Even if you do not recognize it or admit its presence, you cannot escape it. If responsibility is rightfully yours, no evasion, or ignorance or passing the blame can shift the burden to someone else. Unless you can point your finger at the man who is responsible when something goes wrong, then you have never had anyone really responsible.

Representative Van Zandt: Going back again to the New London Groton area, what about the contamination of the waters?

Admiral Rickover: We keep a record of all radioactive water.

Representative Van Zandt: I am speaking of the bay.

Admiral Rickover: I am glad you asked that, sir. We keep a record of the minor amount of water that is discharged from each submarine. In fact, even the water going right through the reactor while it is operating is generally so pure from a radioactivity standpoint that it is within drinking water tolerance. This is so because of the way we design our reactor plants. The amount of radioactivity we have discharged into New London harbor has been checked by the local authorities, by the Connecticut State Department of Health and by the U.S. Public Health Service and it is well within drinking water tolerance. We have never had a single case where it has been otherwise.

To give you another example, the amount of radioactivity being discharged into the Ohio River from the Shippingport reactor is about onemillionth the radioactivity that is discharged into the Columbia River by the Hanford reactors.

Representative Van Zandt: Admiral, is it not true that in a nuclear powered submarine—we have experience yet to gain as far as surface ships are concerned—the control room is manned around the clock.

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir.

Representative Van Zandt: Whether the ship is at sea or whether it is at port?

Admiral Rickover: We have qualified people on board at all times, even during overhaul, yes, sir.

Senator Jackson: You mentioned the contamination in the Columbia in comparison with your record in connection with the nuclear powered submarines. I want to say that the proposed dual purpose reactor will help to eliminate that situation.

Admiral Rickover: Yes, sir, I know that. I am glad you put in a plug for your State.

Representative Van Zandt: One more question, Admiral. Over a period of years there has been some resistance on the part of those who control harbors in foreign countries admitting nuclear powered submarines. I take it from your statement that there is nothing to fear as far as the water of the harbor is concerned from the standpoint of contamination. But there is always the possibility of an accident. What would you say the ratio of the accident is?

Admiral Rickover: I do not think you can talk about the ratio of an accident. It is my firm conviction that a reactor properly designed and properly operated will not have an accident. Nevertheless, since there is always such a potential, I consider it unwise and unnecessary to send a nuclear powered ship into a foreign port unless there is a real purpose or a need. I would like to amplify this because it is an issue which is under discussion and will continue to be under discussion from now on. For example, suppose you have a choice of sending a nuclear powered ship into one of two ports, one being a populated area or close to a populated area and one is not. I would always pick the one that is less densely populated.

We try in the Navy only to send ships into ports, or we should, where there is a military necessity. But military necessity can mean several things. In wartime, of course, the issue would not arise. In peacetime it may be connected with fleet operations. We may want to put ships in the Mediterranean, and we will have to put nuclear ships into ports along with the other ships, for logistic support and because we have to give our sailors liberty. We also have to shut down various parts of the plants for maintenance and repair purposes.

I believe there is justification for sending ships into ports for these purposes. But we should always remember that there is some finite chance of accident. So we should not take unnecessary chances where they are avoidable.

I do not know whether I have answered your question exactly. I am not fearful of contaminating harbor waters. I am not really fearful of any accident, although with a nuclear power plant, if it does have an accident, the consequences will be more serious than with any other type of power plant.

Representative Van Zandt: One final question. I know you will probably make a frank statement. Based on what you read in the press and probably the access you have had to official records, what is your opinion of the accident at Arco?

Admiral Rickover: I believe it was an avoidable accident. There may have been some errors in design. There may have been inadequate training or faulty operation. I think that to have an accident you have to have a combination of several circumstances. One error by itself will not cause an accident. For example, in that reactor, had there been adequate training and proper operation the design alone would have not caused the accident. Proper training even with faulty design could have prevented the accident. Good supervision could have prevented the accident, even with faulty design and bad training. All nuclear accidents that have happened so far could have been avoided if the training and operation had been adequate.

Representative Van Zandt: The other day we received information as to the training of the military personnel who lost their lives in the Arco accident. At the time I was of the opinion that the training they received in no way compared with the training that you require of naval personnel.

Admiral Rickover: Mr. Van Zandt, I am not familiar with the training they had.

Representative Van Zandt: This is my own opinion.

Admiral Rickover: I would go back further than that. I think you have to go back to the man who came up here and asked you to appropriate for that reactor. You had a right to assume at that point, when you were recommending assignment of Government funds to him, that he was going to be responsible for it.

I suggest that from now on when a man comes to your committee and requests money, you ask him, “What is going to be your responsibility?” If he is not responsible, you should not give him the money. Find out who is responsible. If no one is responsible, then Mr. Dillon will be very happy.

Senator Jackson: Thank you, Admiral Rickover. We appreciated having your helpful testimony today.

Admiral Rickover: Thank you, sir, for the opportunity.





TWELVE: BASIC PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL REACTORS PROGRAM[1]





This chapter is another example of Rickover’s many testimonies before Congress. The occasion of this particular testimony was Congress’s investigation of the root cause of the core meltdown at Three Mile Island. The purpose of the testimony was to understand what difference there might have been between Rickover’s program with its proven safety record and the commercial nuclear industry. Here Rickover provides a rare prepared statement that doesn’t offer his opinions on what the differences might be but simply describes the principles that guide his program. One that the commercial industry took to heart was Rickover’s view on the importance of training to ensure the best human performance. Congress would again review the Naval Reactors program for similar reasons after NASA’s loss of the Columbia space shuttle.





There are a number of facts which have been released by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission regarding Three Mile Island. These facts seem to me to reinforce many of the underlying basic principles of the Naval Reactors Program.

Over the years, many people have asked me how I run the Naval Reactors Program, so that they might find some benefit for their own work. I am always chagrined at the tendency of people to expect that I have a simple, easy gimmick that makes my program function. They are disappointed when they find out there is none. Any successful program functions as an integrated whole of many factors. Trying to select one aspect as the key one will not work. Each element depends on all the other elements.

I recall once several years ago an Admiral, whose conventionally powered ships were suffering serious engineering problems, asked me for a copy of one specific procedure I used to identify equipment which was not operating properly. He believed that would solve his problem, but it did not. That Admiral did not have the vaguest understanding of the problem or how to solve it, he was merely searching for a simple answer, a check off list, that he hoped would magically solve his problem.

I cannot overemphasize the importance of this thought in your current deliberations. The problems you face cannot be solved by specifying compliance with one or two simple procedures. Reactor safety requires adherence to a total concept wherein all elements are recognized as important and each is constantly reinforced.

TECHNICAL COMPETENCE

One of the elements needed in solving a complex technical problem is to have the individuals who make the decisions trained in the technology involved. A concept widely accepted in some circles is that all you need is to get a college degree in management and then, regardless of the technical subject, you can apply your management techniques to run any program, including the Presidency, Congress, or the Vatican. This has become a tenet of our modern society, but it is as valid as the once widely held precept Reactor safety requires adherence to a total concept wherein all elements are recognized as important and each is constantly reinforced. that the world is flat. Properly running a sophisticated technical program requires a fundamental understanding of and commitment to the technical aspects of the job and a willingness to pay infinite attention to the technical details. This can only be done by one who understands the details and their implications. The phrase “the devil is in the detail” is especially true for technical work. If you ignore those details and attempt to rely on management techniques or gimmicks you will surely end up with a system that is unmanageable, and problems will be immensely more difficult to solve. At Naval Reactors, I take individuals who are good engineers and make them into managers. They do not manage by gimmicks but rather by knowledge, logic, common sense, and hard work.

RESPONSIBILITY

Another essential element is that of responsibility. In the beginning of the Naval program it was apparent to me that due to the uniqueness of nuclear power and its potential effect on public safety, a new concept of total responsibility had to be established both within the Navy and the then Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). It would not work if one person was responsible for nuclear power plants in the Navy, and a different person responsible in the AEC. Similarly, it would not work if there was one person in the AEC responsible for the Naval program with a different person responsible for the AEC laboratories doing the work for the Naval Reactors Program. It would not work in the Navy if five or six different Admirals all had charge of different pieces of the program, as is often the case in other areas. It would not work if there was one person responsible for research and development, someone else responsible for construction, and another responsible for training and operation, and still another for repair work.

This kind of compartmentalization of responsibility is typical of government work, but the practice of having shared responsibility really means that no one is responsible. It reminds me of the figure in Nast’s cartoon of the Tweed Ring, where all of the characters stand in a circle, each one pointing his thumb at his neighbor as the responsible person. Unless you can point your finger at the one person who is responsible when something goes wrong, then you have never had anyone really responsible.

For these reasons, I did all I could to gain support for my concept of responsibility. It required that a single position be established to handle both the Navy and the AEC parts of the job. I think it might be of value to this subcommittee to outline how this designation of responsibility was derived from the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, and how it is carried out all the way down to the ships, whether in construction, operation, or overhaul. I have such an outline and with your permission I would like to include it in the record with my statement.

I can assure you that having only one individual responsible for a total program is a unique concept within the Department of Defense. I want to emphasize that throughout this entire period of over thirty years I have had full support from the Congress, mainly through the former Joint Committee on Atomic Energy and the Armed Services and Appropriations Committees, and from the Atomic Energy Commissions and its successors, the Energy Research and Development Administration and now the Department of Energy. I have not had such consistent support from the Navy or the Department of Defense.

FACING THE FACTS

Another principle for successful application of a sophisticated technology is to resist the human inclination to hope that things will work out, despite evidence or suspicions to the contrary. This may seem obvious, but it is a human factor you must be conscious of and actively guard against. It can affect you in subtle ways, particularly when you have spent a lot of time and energy on a project and feel personally responsible for it, and thus somewhat possessive. It is a common human problem, and it is not easy to admit what you thought was correct did not turn out that way.

If conditions require it, you must face the facts and brutally make needed changes despite significant costs and schedule delays. There have been a number of times during the course of my work that I have made decisions to stop work and redesign or rebuild equipment to provide the needed high degree of assurance of satisfactory performance. This person in charge must personally set the example in this area and require his subordinates to do likewise.

I will now discuss in greater detail the underlying basic principles of the Naval Reactors program.

PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN AND ENGINEERING

From the very beginning of the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program I recognized that there were a large number of engineering problems in putting a naval reactor into a submarine. Some problems were unique to submarine application, and some to the general problem of making a reactor plant work. I realized at the time that the use of nuclear power, as with any new sophisticated technology, would require the institution of novel requirements and standards. I realized that these requirements would necessarily be difficult to meet, and the standards would need to be more stringent than those which had been used in power plants up to that time. But when you are at the frontiers of science you must be prepared to accept the discipline this requires in order to proceed. The fact that the application of nuclear power was almost entirely an engineering problem—not a problem of nuclear physics, as nearly all of the “experts” then believed—was clear to me. The emphasis I have placed on sound, conservative engineering has been a major factor in the performance of our plants.

I should point out that in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s, when the original naval nuclear propulsion plant design studies began, there were no standards, design studies, or codes available. They had to be developed. Due to the military application, these design criteria included considerations of reliability, battle damage, high shock and the close proximity of the crew to the reactor plant. The propulsion plant design had to be readily maintainable so possible equipment failures at sea could be repaired. The fact that major maintenance operations would be infrequent and refueling possibly as seldom as once in the ship’s lifetime, required that standards for materials and systems be very rigorous and that only premium products which had a proven pedigree could be considered for use. My design objective is and has been to provide a warship that can be relied upon to perform its mission, and return.

CONSERVATISM OF DESIGN

I will explain some of the elements of good engineering as I have applied them to the reactor plants for which I am responsible. First, in any engineering endeavor, and particularly in an advanced field such as nuclear power, conservatism is necessary, so as to allow for possible unknown and unforeseen effects. This conservatism must be built into the design from the very beginning. If the basic design is not conservative, it quickly becomes impracticable to provide the needed conservatism. It then becomes necessary to add complexities to the system in an attempt to compensate for the inadequacies of the basic design. These complexities, in turn, serve to reduce conservatism and reliability.

I must make it clear that the military requirements which must be met by naval propulsion reactors are far more exacting than those which central station plants must endure. For example, the shock loadings for which naval plants are designed are far greater than the earthquake shock loadings for civilian plants. In addition, Naval plants must be able to accommodate power transients much more rapidly than civilian plants. Each Naval vessel depends entirely on its own reactor plant for the capability to perform its mission. For a ship there is no inter-connected grid to pick up the load and allow the ship to continue functioning. The stringent requirements of operating a ship at sea are reflected in a conservative design with a large overall design margin in almost every element of the plant.

Some specific examples of the conservatism in design which I have used are:

Use of ordinary water of high purity as the reactor coolant. Water has been widely used in industrial applications; its properties are well-known, and when irradiated, has short-lived radioactivity.

Use of conservative limits for systems and equipment. Design based on the worst credible set of circumstances, rather than relying on a statistical approach which deals in average or probable conditions.

Provision in the design for redundancy so that failure of one component, or one portion of a system, will not result in shutting the plant down, or in damage to the reactor.

Design of the reactor plant to enable it to accommodate expected transients, without the need for immediate operator action. This means the plant is inherently stable, and helps the operator when there is an unusual transient.

Simple system design, so that minimum reliance need be placed on automatic control. Reliance is primarily placed on direct operator control.

Selection of materials with which there is known experience for the type of application intended, and which, insofar as practicable, do not require special controls for procurement, fabrication, and maintenance which could lead to problems if not properly accomplished.

Use of a land-based prototype of the same design as the shipboard plant. This prototype plant can be tested and subjected to the potential transients a shipboard plant will experience, prior to operation of the shipboard plant.

Use of extensive analyses, full scale mockups, and tests to confirm the design.

Strict control of manufacture of all equipment, including extensive inspections by specially trained inspectors during the course of manufacture and on the finished equipment. This means that at many points during the manufacture an independent check is required, with signed certification that the step has been completed properly.

Providing extensive detailed operating procedures and manuals, prepared and approved by technical people knowledgeable of the plant design. These manuals are constantly updated as we learn from the operations of the many other reactors. What we learn on one plant is incorporated into all our plants.

Placing particular attention on designing, building and operating the plant so as to prevent accidents, and thus avoid undue reliance on the systems and procedures provided to cope with accidents which could occur.

Use of frequent, thorough, and detailed audits of all aspects of the program by individuals who are specifically selected and trained.

Use of formal documentation for design decisions, manufacturing procedures, inspection requirements, and inspection results.

In addition to the detailed technical review and approval by my office, the safety aspects of operation of Naval nuclear powered ships are independently reviewed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards.



APPROACH TO NEW REACTORS

The kind of engineering approach I have just outlined is, in my opinion, why the Naval Reactors Program has resulted in safe, reliable nuclear power. To the casual reader much of what I have said may appear obvious. But I assure you it is not when you try to carry out these concepts in everyday work. I have encountered many cases where these ideas are ignored or not understood. I have, on many occasions, reviewed proposals for smaller, lighter, and cheaper reactors. While such proposals have covered a wide variety of reactor concepts, they have been completely consistent in one respect; they have all involved the sacrifice of sound, conservative engineering to achieve a design theoretically having better performance. They each violated most, if not all of the engineering principles I have just discussed. They would all have been, in my opinion, unsafe and unsatisfactory for Naval warship application. How often have you known of cases where in the fervor of winning contracts, firms will promise all kinds of performance, only to be found incapable of delivering it when they try to make the equipment work? By this, I do not mean we should not make improvements. We have. But at all stages you must proceed in accordance with sound, conservative engineering practices if you are to produce something that will work, vice something that is just an expensive piece of unreliable and unsafe junk.

As an example, I have often been pressed to reduce radiation shielding to make new ships smaller and lighter. However, if I removed 100 tons of radiation shielding from a typical submarine, the ship would be only two percent lighter. But the radiation exposures to ship personnel would increase to ten times the current levels. I have not agreed to reducing shielding because I believe radiation exposure to personnel should be as low as I can reasonably obtain.

NAVAL NUCLEAR TRAINING

Another element in my approach to safe operation of Naval reactor plants involves the selection and training of the operators. In brief, I consider the training of officers and men to be at least as important as any other element of the Navy Nuclear Power Program. I consider it of the greatest importance that the mental abilities, qualities of judgment, and level of training be commensurate with the responsibility involved in operating a nuclear reactor. The selection of personnel and their training in the Naval Nuclear Power Program are carried out with these considerations in mind.

Academic ability, personal character as demonstrated by any acts reflecting unreliability, and honest desire for the nuclear program are all taken into account in selection of personnel. Once selected for the Naval Nuclear Power Program, the individual is continually subject to review.

To accomplish these objectives, I require a one year training period prior to an operator going on board his first nuclear ship. The first six months of nuclear power training are spent at Nuclear Power School in Orlando, Florida, where the curriculum concentrates on the theoretical basis for shipboard systems. Upon graduation from Nuclear Power School the student reports to one of our land-based prototype plants where he learns to actually operate the propulsion plant. There the student must demonstrate that he can operate the plant under normal and casualty conditions, and is taught to operate in strict compliance with detailed operating and casualty procedures.

I established the Naval Nuclear Power Training Program on a base of rigid high standards. My staff at Naval Reactors approves the curriculum at Nuclear Power School and the qualification guides used to develop the prototype and shipboard operator qualification programs. This ensures that the standards are not reduced by someone who does not understand the overall goals of the program, and that the individuals responsible for the design and construction of the reactor plant systems are involved in the training considerations on that system.

The methods we use in training involve lectures, seminars, homework assignments and both oral and written examinations. We also require operators to be able to demonstrate their practical knowledge in order to become qualified at the land-based prototype. These individuals must subsequently qualify on board ship. I am not satisfied with bringing an operator to a qualified level once, and then forgetting about him. Therefore, we continually reinforce theoretical and practical training with a continuing training program. This includes frequent practice in plant evolutions and casualty drills.

The examinations given must be tough, and must be approved by a competent person in authority. Instructors are trained so that they are capable of correctly instructing the student. Instructors, as well as students, are monitored.

Inspections of personnel in the fleet are conducted by members of my staff, both those in the field and from headquarters; by the Fleet Nuclear Propulsion Examining Boards established by the Chief of Naval Operations; and by nuclear trained personnel on various other naval staffs. I review the results of all their inspections.

I have established a formal system of reporting propulsion plant problems which identifies areas which need improvement in the training program. I also require the Commanding Officer of each nuclear powered ship to write me periodically concerning propulsion plant problems. These letters contain a summary of the training he has conducted and allow me to personally check the adequacy.

These are just the main elements of the training efforts in my program. Because training is so important, I want to provide a much more detailed description of what we do for your record. I know you do not have time for me to read this description now, but I strongly recommend that all the committee members read it because it may be of value in your review.

MISTAKES MUST BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT

What I have presented at this point represents the main substance of my statement. In it I have outlined what I do in running the Naval Reactors Program. Even when these measures are carried out it is important to recognize that mistakes will be made, because we are dealing with machines that cannot be perfect. The human body is God’s finest creation and yet we get sick. If we cannot have perfect human beings then why should we expect, philosophically, that machines designed by human beings will be more perfect than their creators? That is what many unthinking people demand even though the Lord Himself did not reach this height. I believe if you follow the practices of conservative engineering and personnel training I have outlined and if you carry them out with steadfast commitment, nuclear power can be safely used, even taking into account mistakes that will inevitably occur. That is the basis on which I have conducted all my work in this field and I believe it true just as strongly today as I ever have.

DECISION ON NUCLEAR POWER

As well as anyone in this room, I recognize that nuclear power is a very difficult subject for anyone to deal with. It involves energy—a vital element in our nation’s future. It involves individuals’ concern for themselves and their families, and it is a highly technical, sophisticated technology. Ultimately, the decision as to whether we will have nuclear power is a political one—in the true sense of the word—that is, one made by the people through their elected representatives. It is vital that the decision be made on the basis of fact, not rhetoric, not conjecture or hope, or as the result of the widespread tendency to sensationalize the current topic and ignore the real limits or risks of the alternative.

I am not an expert or even particularly knowledgeable in the areas of environmental effects of other forms of power generation. However, I am aware that a good many knowledgeable people conclude that the total risk involved in the use of nuclear power is no greater than is involved in the use of any alternative source which can be tapped in the next 50 years.

I also remember the optimistic projections made for nuclear power when it was first being developed. These sprang from hope and from ignorance of the real engineering problems that would be encountered in using nuclear power. There is no reason to believe that current projections for alternative means of providing large amounts of power are any more precise. Any large scale generation of power involves major engineering difficulties and potential environmental impacts.

The job of this committee and the Congress in the days ahead will not be easy. I hope and pray you will find the strength and wisdom to make the right decisions. I also hope that my testimony will in some way contribute to your difficult deliberations.





THIRTEEN: DOING A JOB[1]





This chapter was given as a speech at the Egleston Medal Award Dinner at the Columbia University School of Engineering and Applied Science on November 5, 1981, which turned out to be a few months before Rickover’s retirement. The Egleston Medal recognizes distinguished engineering alumni from Columbia. Rickover was awarded the Egleston Medal in 1955 and was a guest speaker at the award ceremony in 1981. Here he promotes what he calls the common-sense approach to management, which recognizes that individuals accomplish work—not organizations.





In 1929 I attended the Columbia School of Engineering for postgraduate study in electrical engineering. Columbia was the first institution that encouraged me to think rather than memorize. My teachers were notable in that many had gained practical engineering experience outside the university and were able to share their experience with their students. I am grateful, among others, to Professors Morecroft, Hehre, and Arendt. Much of what I have subsequently learned and accomplished in engineering is based on the solid foundation of principles I learned from them. I am therefore especially gratified by your invitation to return and speak this evening.

In 1939 I became head of the electrical section of the Bureau of Ships. In this capacity I was responsible for the design, manufacture, and operation of the electrical equipment for the Navy as it rapidly expanded throughout World War II. Since 1947, after a year studying nuclear engineering at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, I have been responsible for the research, design, construction, and operation of the nuclear reactors and the propulsion machinery of the Navy’s nuclear-powered ships; also for the Shippingport, Pennsylvania, nuclear power station—the first commercial nuclear power plant.

In the course of my work, I have interviewed more than 14,000 recently graduated college students for jobs in my organization and in nuclear ships. In recent years a surprising number of applicants, even graduates of engineering schools and the Naval Academy, have become enamored with the study of management—some even majoring in this subject.

Almost without exception they are fluent in the jargon of systems analysis, financial manipulation, and quantitative management. They graduate convinced they have learned management techniques that will enable them to administer any job. Yet most seem to have an unrealistic perception of what is actually involved, with little appreciation of the importance of technical knowledge, experience, and hard work.

Many who teach management in our universities do their students and society a disservice. By focusing on the techniques of “modern management,” they promote the idea that by mastering a few simple principles of how to handle people and situations one can become a universal manager: capable of running any job without having to know much about the work to be managed.

Our factories and companies are increasingly being bought, sold, and operated by professional administrators, lawyers, and financial experts who have little understanding of their products, the technology involved, or the needs of customers. As these professional “managers” reach top corporate positions, others emulate them and avoid technical education in favor of management studies. In my opinion, our universities should emphasize the importance of a solid grounding in substantive learning and downgrade socalled management science.

What it takes to do a job will not be learned from management courses. It is principally a matter of experience, the proper attitude, and common sense—none of which can be taught in a classroom.

After a lifetime of work I conclude that what can be said about doing a job is hardly enough for one lecture, let alone an entire field of study. The key points of such a lecture I would summarize as follows:

Human experience shows that people, not organizations or management systems, get things done. For this reason subordinates must be given authority and responsibility early in their careers. In this way they develop quickly and can help the manager do his work. The manager, of course, remains ultimately responsible and must accept the blame if subordinates make mistakes.

As subordinates develop, work should be constantly added so that no one can finish his job. This serves as a prod and a challenge. It brings out their capabilities and frees the manager to assume added responsibilities. As members of the organization become capable of assuming new and more difficult duties, they develop pride in doing the job well. This attitude soon permeates the entire organization.

One must permit his people the freedom to seek added work and greater responsibility. In my organization, there are no formal job descriptions or organization charts. Responsibilities are defined in a general way, so that people are not circumscribed. All are permitted to do as they think best and to go to anyone and anywhere for help. Each person then is limited only by his own ability.

Complex jobs cannot be accomplished effectively with transients. Therefore, a manager must make the work challenging and rewarding so that his people will remain with the organization for many years. This allows it to benefit fully from their knowledge, experience, and corporate memory.

The Defense Department does not recognize the need for continuity in important jobs. It rotates officers every few years both at headquarters and in the field. The same applies to their civilian superiors.

This system virtually ensures inexperience and non-accountability. By the time an officer has begun to learn a job, it is time for him to rotate. Under this system, incumbents can blame their problems on predecessors. They are assigned to another job before the results of their work become evident. Subordinates cannot be expected to remain committed to a job and perform effectively when they are continuously adapting to a new job or to a new boss.

When doing a job—any job—one must feel that he owns it, and act as though he will remain in that job forever. He must look after his work just as conscientiously as though it were his own business and his own money. If he feels he is only a temporary custodian, or that the job is just a stepping stone to a higher position, his actions will not take into account the long-term interests of the organization. His lack of commitment to the present job will be perceived by those who work for him, and they, likewise, will tend not to care. Too many spend their entire working lives looking for the next job. When one feels he owns his present job and acts that way, he need have no concern about his next job.

In accepting responsibility for a job, a person must get directly involved. Every manager has a personal responsibility not only to find problems but to correct them. This responsibility comes before all other obligations, before personal ambition or comfort.

A major flaw in our system of government, and even in industry, is the latitude allowed to do less than is necessary. Too often officials are willing to accept and adapt to situations they know to be wrong. The tendency is to down-play problems instead of actively trying to correct them. Recognizing this, many subordinates give up, contain their views within themselves, and wait for others to take action. When this happens, the manager is deprived of the experience and ideas of subordinates who generally are more knowledgeable than he in their particular areas.

A manager must instill in his people an attitude of personal responsibility for seeing a job properly accomplished. Unfortunately, this seems to be declining, particularly in large organizations where responsibility is broadly distributed. To complaints of a job poorly done, one often hears the excuse “I am not responsible.” I believe that is literally correct. The man who takes such a stand in fact is not responsible; he is irresponsible. While he may not be legally liable, or the work may not have been specifically assigned to him, no one involved in a job can divest himself of responsibility for its successful completion.

Unless the individual truly responsible can be identified when something goes wrong, no one has really been responsible. With the advent of modern management theories it is becoming common for organizations to deal with problems in a collective manner, by dividing programs into subprograms, with no one left responsible for the entire effort. There is also the tendency to establish more and more levels of management, on the theory that this gives better control. These are but different forms of shared responsibility, which easily lead to no one being responsible—a problem that often inheres in large corporations as well as in the Defense Department.

When I came to Washington before World War II to head the electrical section of the Bureau of Ships, I found that one man was in charge of design, another of production, a third handled maintenance, while a fourth dealt with fiscal matters. The entire bureau operated that way. It didn’t make sense to me. Design problems showed up in production, production errors showed up in maintenance, and financial matters reached into all areas. I changed the system. I made one responsible for his entire area of equipment—for design, production, maintenance, and contracting. If anything went wrong, I knew exactly at whom to point. I run my present organization on the same principle.

A good manager must have an unshakable determination and tenacity. Deciding what needs to be done is easy, getting it done is more difficult. Good ideas are not adopted automatically. They must be driven into practice with courageous impatience. Once implemented they can be easily overturned or subverted through apathy or lack of follow-up, so a continuous effort is required. Too often, important problems are recognized but no one is willing to sustain the effort needed to solve them.

Nothing worthwhile can be accomplished without determination. In the early days of nuclear power, for example, getting approval to build the first nuclear submarine—the Nautilus—was almost as difficult as designing and building it. Many in the Navy opposed building a nuclear submarine.

In the same way, the Navy once viewed nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and cruisers as too expensive, despite their obvious advantages of unlimited cruising range and ability to remain at sea without vulnerable support ships. Yet today our nuclear submarine fleet is widely recognized as our nation’s most effective deterrent to nuclear war. Our nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and cruisers have proven their worth by defending our interests all over the world—even in remote trouble spots such as the Indian Ocean, where the capability of oil-fired ships would be severely limited by their dependence on fuel supplies.

The man in charge must concern himself with details. If he does not consider them important, neither will his subordinates. Yet “the devil is in the details.” It is hard and monotonous to pay attention to seemingly minor matters. In my work I probably spend about 99 percent of my time on what others may call petty details. Most managers would rather focus on lofty policy matters. But when the details are ignored, the project fails. No infusion of policy or lofty ideals can then correct the situation.

To maintain proper control one must have simple and direct means to find out what is going on. There are many ways of doing this; all involve constant drudgery. For this reason those in charge often create “management information systems” designed to extract from the operation the details a busy executive needs to know. Often the process is carried too far. The top official then loses touch with his people and with the work that is actually going on.

Attention to detail does not require a manager to do everything himself. No one can work more than 24 hours each day. Therefore, to multiply his efforts, he must create an environment where his subordinates can work to their maximum ability. Some management experts advocate strict limits to the number of people reporting to a common superior—generally five to seven. But if one has capable people who require but a few moments of his time during the day, there is no reason to set such arbitrary constraints. Some 40 key people report frequently and directly to me. This enables me to keep up with what is going on and makes it possible for them to get fast action. The latter aspect is particularly important. Capable people will not work for long where they cannot get prompt decisions and actions from their superior.

I require frequent reports, both oral and written, from many key people in the nuclear program. These include the commanding officers of our nuclear ships, those in charge of our schools and laboratories, and representatives at manufacturers’ plants and commercial shipyards. I insist they report the problems they have found directly to me—and in plain English. This provides them unlimited flexibility in subject matter—something that often is not accommodated in highly structured management systems—and a way to communicate their problems and recommendations to me without having them filtered through others. The Defense Department, with its excessive layers of management, suffers because those at the top who make the decisions are generally isolated from their subordinates, who have the firsthand knowledge.

To do a job effectively, one must set priorities. Too many people let their “in” basket set the priorities. On any given day, unimportant but interesting trivia pass through an office; one must not permit these to monopolize his time. The human tendency is to while away time with unimportant matters that do not require mental effort or energy. Since they can be easily resolved, they give a false sense of accomplishment. The manager must exert self-discipline to ensure that his energy is focused where it is truly needed.

All work should be checked through an independent and impartial review. In engineering and manufacturing, industry spends large sums on quality control. But the concept of impartial reviews and oversight is important in other areas also. Even the most dedicated individual makes mistakes—and many workers are less than dedicated. I have seen much poor work and sheer nonsense generated in government and in industry because it was not checked properly.

One must create the ability in his staff to generate clear, forceful arguments for opposing viewpoints as well as for their own. Open discussions and disagreements must be encouraged, so that all sides of an issue will be fully explored. Further, important issues should be presented in writing. Nothing so sharpens the thought process as writing down one’s arguments. Weaknesses overlooked in oral discussion become painfully obvious on the written page.

When important decisions are not documented, one becomes dependent on individual memory, which is quickly lost as people leave or move to other jobs. In my work, it is important to be able to go back a number of years to determine the facts that were considered in arriving at a decision. This makes it easier to resolve new problems by putting them into proper perspective. It also minimizes the risk of repeating past mistakes. Moreover, if important communications and actions are not documented clearly, one can never be sure they were understood or even executed.

It is a human inclination to hope things will work out, despite evidence or doubt to the contrary. A successful manager must resist this temptation. This is particularly hard if one has invested much time and energy on a project and thus has come to feel possessive about it. Although it is not easy to admit what a person once thought correct now appears to be wrong, one must discipline himself to face the facts objectively and make the necessary changes—regardless of the consequences to himself. The man in charge must personally set the example in this respect. He must be able, in effect, to “kill his own child” if necessary and must require his subordinates to do likewise. I have had to go to Congress and, because of technical problems, recommend terminating a project that had been funded largely on my sayso. It is not a pleasant task, but one must be brutally objective in his work.

No management system can substitute for hard work. A manager who does not work hard or devote extra effort cannot expect his people to do so. He must set the example. The manager may not be the smartest or most knowledgeable person, but if he dedicates himself to the job and devotes the required effort, his people will follow his lead.

The ideas I have mentioned are not new—previous generations recognized the value of hard work, attention to detail, personal responsibility, and determination. And these, rather than the highly touted modern management techniques, are still the qualities most important in doing a job. Together they embody a common sense approach to management, one that cannot be taught by professors of management in a classroom.

I am not against business education. A knowledge of accounting, finance, business law, and the like can be of value in a business environment. What I do believe is harmful is the impression often created by those who teach management that one will be able to manage any job simply by applying certain management techniques together with some simple academic rules of how to manage people and situations.

There is concern today over the apparent decline in U.S. productivity. In searching for its causes we should not overlook the impact of the many professional administrators who run large corporations. Though trained in management at our leading universities, they are often unskilled in the technical aspects of the company. As a result they manage largely in the terms they learned at school. Technical, operational, and production issues are quickly reduced to issues of numbers and dollars, upon which these administrators apply their management techniques. Although in this way they may achieve financial benefits, an overemphasis on short-term profits often ignores broader issues such as efficient production or planning for the future. How can they act otherwise, when they have knowledge only of management theories learned in school?

Universities must accept their share of the blame for this situation. They have played a key role in promoting so-called management science, often at the expense of more substantive topics such as engineering. If students are the country’s future, how can we justify this waste of their talent?

The students of today attend college, as I did over 50 years ago, to lay the groundwork for the expertise they will develop only after years of experience in their field. It is the obligation of Columbia University, as it is of all colleges, to seek to provide them a sound basis upon which to build their careers—one that is realistic and practical. We would be far better off graduating fewer technically capable young men with realistic ideas of what it actually takes to do their work, than to graduate a larger number highly skilled in the techniques of so-called management yet incapable of doing a job.





PART IV: TECHNOLOGY’S IMPACT ON SOCIETY





Admiral Rickover was something of an amateur historian, and his style of writing was to consider topics from a historical perspective. That is, he took the long view—not only when looking back but also when looking forward.

Rickover’s perspective herein is that science develops knowledge of our world, while technology uses knowledge and resources to benefit people. The forebear of the true modern scientist is the Western natural philosopher who sought knowledge of the world as a way to better understand God the Creator. Thus, the scientist has no moral considerations in his quest to understand nature—the exception being when studying humans. This is not true of the engineer who uses knowledge to develop or sustain a technology for human use. For Rickover, technology requires action that needs moral evaluation of the corresponding risk/reward relationships.

In the following four chapters, Rickover provides his long-term perspectives on the risk/reward relationships associated with energy (Chapter 14), society’s role in developing technology (Chapters 15 and 16), and the environment (Chapter 17).





FOURTEEN: ENERGY RESOURCES AND OUR FUTURE[1]





This chapter was originally given as the keynote speech at a conference of the Minnesota Medical Association on May 14, 1957. The version in this book was published as a chapter in Rickover’s first book, Education and Freedom (1959). The importance of this speech was recognized 50 years later by Congressman Roscoe Bartlett who commemorated it on the floor of the House on May 14, 2007. This was an early argument for preparing for what was to be called the day of peak oil. Rickover advocated thinking of our fossil fuel reserves as principal in a trust fund to be used with care and saved as much as possible for future generations. His comparison of modern-day energy consumption to that in antiquity is a powerful commentary on how technology has impacted modern life.





We live in what historians may someday call the Fossil Fuel Age. Today coal, oil, and natural gas supply 93 per cent of the world’s energy; water power accounts for only 1 per cent; and the labor of men and domestic animals the remaining 6 per cent. This is a startling reversal of corresponding figures for 1850, only a century ago. Then fossil fuels supplied 5 per cent of the world’s energy and men and animals 94 per cent.

Five sixths of all the coal, oil, and gas consumed since the beginning of the Fossil Fuel Age has been burned up in the last fifty-five years.

These fuels have been known to man for more than three thousand years. In parts of China, coal was used for domestic heating and cooking, and natural gas for lighting, as early as 1000 B.C. The Babylonians burned asphalt a thousand years earlier. These early uses were sporadic and of no economic significance. Fossil fuels did not become a major source of energy until machines running on coal, gas, or oil were invented. Wood, for example, was the most important fuel until 1880 when it was replaced by coal; coal, in turn, has only recently been surpassed by oil in this country.

Once in full swing, fossil fuel consumption has accelerated at phenomenal rates. All the fossil fuels used before 1900 would not last five years at today’s rates of consumption.

Nowhere are these rates higher and growing faster than in the United States. Our country, with only 6 per cent of the world’s population, uses one third of the world’s total energy input; this proportion would be even greater but for the fact that we use energy more efficiently than other countries. Each American has at his disposal, each year, energy equivalent to that obtainable from eight tons of coal. This is six times the world’s per-capita energy consumption. Though not quite so spectacular, corresponding figures for other highly industrialized countries also show above-average consumption figures. The United Kingdom, for example, uses more than three times as much energy as the world average.

With high energy consumption goes a high standard of living. Thus the enormous fossil energy which we in this country control feeds machines which make each of us masters of an army of mechanical slaves. Man’s muscle power is rated at thirty-five watts continuously, or one twentieth horsepower. Machines therefore furnish every American industrial worker with energy equivalent to that of 244 men, while at least two thousand men push his automobile along the road, and his family is supplied with thirtythree faithful household helpers. Each locomotive engineer controls energy equivalent to that of 100,000 men; each jet pilot of 700,000 men. Truly, the humblest American enjoys the services of more slaves than were once owned by the richest nobles, and lives better than most ancient kings. In retrospect, and despite wars, revolutions, and disasters, the hundred years just gone by may well seem like a Golden Age.

Whether this Golden Age will continue depends entirely upon our ability to keep energy supplied in balance with the needs of our growing population. Before I go into this question, let me review briefly the role of energy resources in the rise and fall of civilizations.

Possession of surplus energy is, of course, a requisite for any kind of civilization for it provides the material foundation for civilized living—a comfortable and tasteful home instead of a bare shelter; attractive clothing instead of mere covering to keep warm; appetizing food instead of anything that suffices to appease hunger. It provides the freedom from toil without which there can be no art, music, literature, or learning. There is no need to belabor the point. What lifted man, one of the weaker mammals, above the animal world was that he could devise, with his brain, ways to increase the energy at his disposal, and use the leisure so gained to cultivate his mind and spirit. Where man must rely solely on the energy of his own body, he can sustain only the most meager existence.

Man’s first step up the ladder of civilization dates from his discovery of fire and his domestication of animals. With these energy resources he was able to build a pastoral culture. To move on to an agricultural civilization he needed more energy. In the past this was found in the labor of dependent members of large patriarchal families and augmented by slaves obtained through purchase or as war booty. There are some backward communities which to this day depend on this type of energy.

Slave labor was a vital necessity in the city-states and empires of antiquity; they frequently had slave populations as large or larger than their free citizenry. As long as slaves were abundant and no moral censure was attached to their ownership, incentives to search for alternative sources of energy were lacking; this may well have been the single most important reason why engineering advanced very little in ancient times.

A reduction of per-capita energy consumption has always in the past led to a decline in civilization and a reversion to a more primitive way of life. For example, exhaustion of wood fuel is believed to have been the primary reason for the fall of the Mayan civilization on this continent and of the decline of once-flourishing civilizations in Asia. India and China once had large forests as did much of the Middle East. Deforestation not only lessened the energy base but had a further disastrous effect: lacking plant cover, soil washed away, and with soil erosion the nutritional base was reduced as well.

Another cause for declining civilization comes with pressure of population on available land. A point is reached where the land can no longer support both the people and their domestic animals. Horses and mules disappear first, and finally even the versatile water buffalo is displaced by man who is two and a half times as efficient an energy converter as are draft animals. It must always be remembered that while domestic animals and agricultural machines increased productivity per man, maximum productivity per acre can be achieved only by intensive manual cultivation.

It is a sobering thought that the impoverished people of Asia, who today seldom go to sleep with their hunger completely satisfied, were once far more civilized and lived much better than the people of the West—and not so very long ago, either. In the Middle Ages the eyes of Europe were turned to the riches of the East and these riches induced adventurous sailors to brave the high seas in the small vessels searching for a direct route to the fabulous Orient. The “wealth of the Indies” is a phrase still used, but whatever wealth may be there is certainly not evident in the life of the people today.

Asia failed to keep technological pace with the needs of her growing populations and sank into such poverty that in many places man is again the primary source of energy since other energy converters have become too expensive. This must be obvious to the most casual observer. What this means is quite simply a reversion to a primitive stage of civilization with all that it implies for human dignity and happiness.

Anyone who has watched a sweating Chinese coolie[2] strain at his heavily laden wheelbarrow, creaking along a cobblestone road, or who has flinched as he drove past an endless procession of human beasts of burden moving to market in Java—the slender women bent under mountainous loads heaped on their heads—anyone who has so seen statistics translated into flesh and bone realizes the degradation of man’s stature when his muscle power becomes the only energy source he can afford. Civilization must wither when human beings are so degraded.





On the other hand, in societies where a high civilization for the citizenry depended on slave power for energy, abolition of slavery had the immediate effect of reducing energy consumption with consequent decline in civilization. Slavery is incompatible with Christian belief in the worth of the humblest individual as a child of God. As Christianity spread through the Roman Empire and masters freed their slaves—in obedience to the teaching of the Church—the energy base of Roman civilization crumbled. This, some historians believe, may have been a factor in the decline and fall of Rome and the temporary reversion of Europe to the primitive Dark Ages. Slavery gradually disappeared throughout the Western world except in its milder form of serfdom. That it was revived a thousand years later merely shows man’s ability to stifle his conscience, at least for a while, when his economic needs are great. Eventually, even the needs of overseas plantation economies did not suffice to keep alive a practice so deeply repugnant to Western man’s deepest convictions.

It may well be that it was unwillingness to depend on slave labor for their energy needs which turned the minds of medieval Europeans to a search for alternate sources of energy, thereby sparking the Power Revolution of the Middle Ages which, in turn, paved the way for the Industrial Revolution of the nineteenth century. When slavery disappeared in the West, engineering advanced. Men began to harness the power of nature by utilizing water and wind as energy sources. The sailing ship, in particular, which replaced the slave-driven galley of antiquity, was vastly improved by medieval shipbuilders and became the first machine enabling man to control large amounts of inanimate energy.

The next important high-energy converter used by Europeans was gunpowder, an energy source far superior to the muscular strength of the strongest bowman or lancer. With ships that could navigate the high seas and arms that could outfire any hand weapon, Europe was now powerful enough to pre-empt for herself the vast empty areas of the Western Hemisphere into which she poured her surplus populations to build new nations of European stock. With her ships and arms she also gained political control over populous areas in Africa and Asia from which she drew the raw materials needed to speed her industrialization, thus complementing her naval and military dominance with economic and commercial supremacy.

When a low-energy society comes in contact with a high-energy society, the advantage always lies with the latter. The Europeans not only achieved standards of living vastly higher than those of the rest of the world, but they did this while their population was growing at rates far surpassing those of other peoples. In fact, they doubled their share of total world population in the short span of three centuries. From one sixth in 1650, the people of European stock increased to almost one third of total world population by 1950.

Meanwhile much of the rest of the world did not even keep energy sources in balance with population growth. Per-capita energy consumption actually diminished in large areas. It is this difference in energy consumption which has resulted in an ever widening gap between the one-third minority who live in high-energy countries and the two-third majority who live in lowenergy areas. These so-called underdeveloped countries are now finding it far more difficult to catch up with the advanced countries of the West than it was for Europe to initiate transition from low-energy to high-energy consumption. For one thing, their present ratio of land to people is much less favorable than was that of Europe and other Western countries when they began to industrialize; for another, the backward countries have no outlet for surplus populations to ease the transition, as did the industrialized Western countries, because the last empty spaces in the world have long since been taken over by people of European stock.

Although most of today’s low-energy countries have population densities well below those of some of the most prosperous and advanced European countries,[3] their underdeveloped economies cannot support these lower densities on even a modest level of comfort. These countries must depend on intensive manual agriculture which alone yields at least bare subsistence for their people. They do not have enough acreage per capita to justify using domestic animals or farm machinery, although better seeds, better soil management, and better hand tools could bring some improvement. A large part of their working population must remain on the land, and this limits the amount of surplus. Most of these countries must choose between using whatever small energy surplus can be produced to raise their low standard of living or postpone present rewards for the sake of future gain by investing the surplus in new industries. The choice is difficult because there is no guarantee that today’s denial may not prove to have been in vain. This is so because of the rapidity with which public-health measures have reduced mortality rates, resulting in population growth as high or even higher than that of the high-energy nations. Theirs is a bitter choice; it accounts for much of their anti-Western feeling and may well portend a prolonged period of world instability.

How closely energy consumption is related to standards of living may be illustrated by the example of India. Despite intelligent and sustained efforts made since independence, India’s per-capita income is still only twenty cents daily; her infant mortality is four times ours; and the life expectancy of her people is less than one half that of the industrialized countries of the West. These are ultimate consequences of India’s very low-energy consumption: one fourteenth of world average; one eightieth of ours.

Ominous, too, is the fact that despite several unusually good crop years and much effort expended upon improved agriculture, per-capita world food production stands about where it was in 1939. Unfortunately, this apparent balance between food production and population growth hides the fact that per-capita food production has increased only in the already well-fed, highenergy countries but has actually decreased in the undernourished, lowenergy countries. Two-thirds of the world is probably hungrier today than it was twenty years ago. Despairing, hungry people in these countries are most susceptible to the persuasive siren song of Marxism which promises to perform miracles and produce rapid industrialization—the only way out, so they say, of certain semi-starvation which must come with too rapid population growth in countries already overpopulated in terms of their productive capacity. The plight of these people is a human tragedy which wrings the heart. It is also a situation of the greatest peril to the comfortable West. With his usual ruthless logic and brutal forthrightness, Mao has publicly stated that China does not fear an atomic war. She would, he said, be better off if she lost half her present population of 628 million. Mao will soon have atomic weapons, if he does not have them already. With the 300 million men he considers “expendable” as his ace in the hole, he will be hard to trump.

Mao’s words are a sort of epitaph marking the last grim consequence of failure to keep energy sources in balance with population. Seven hundred years ago Marco Polo told an awe-stricken Europe of the marvelously prosperous and orderly China and Kublai Khan. China’s civilization then stood high above that of the West. She even had an ingenious method of searching out the brightest of her people through an elaborate system of education with graduated examinations. Those who survived these examinations had cultivated minds, though of a peculiarly restricted kind, for this education was the most elaborate machine ever invented for perpetuation of the status quo: a gigantic conditioning process which used the best minds of the country to immortalize the wisdom of Confucius and his disciples incorporated in the Four Books and Five Classics, China’s sacred literature. The men who came through the final examination and were thereupon entrusted with high public office could be relied upon to add not an iota to the changeless moral and aesthetic doctrines laid down in the fifth century B.C.; they could be counted upon never to utter an original thought or alter the perfect ordering of the Celestial Empire.

Mental ossification on a high intellectual level prevented China from altering her attitudes and ways of life for millennia. She had, after all, achieved perfection, or so she thought. But the changeless pattern of thought and organization under which China flourished at the time of Marco Polo, when her population was about sixty million, became obsolete as population increased.[4] Though she now has more than ten times that many people, very little was done until recently to increase energy resources. A hard-working, bright, and practical—perhaps too practical—people has now reached the ultimate human degradation when half of China’s living human beings are of no use except as atomic cannon fodder which a heartless ruler feels free to sacrifice in the sacred name of Marxism and world conquest.

I think no further elaboration is needed to demonstrate the significance of energy resources for our own future. Our civilization rests upon a technological base which requires enormous quantities of fossil fuels. What assurance then do we have that our energy needs will continue to be supplied by fossil fuels? The answer is, in the long run, none.

The earth is finite. Fossil fuels are not renewable. In this respect our energy base differs from that of all earlier civilizations. They could have maintained their energy supply by careful cultivation. We cannot. Fuel that has been burned is gone forever. Fuel is even more evanescent than metals. Metals, too, are nonrenewable resources threatened with eventual extinction, but something can be salvaged from scrap. Fuel leaves no scrap and there is nothing man can do to rebuild exhausted fossil fuel reserves. They were created by solar energy five hundred million years ago and took eons to grow to their present volume.

In the face of the basic fact that fossil fuel reserves are finite, the exact length of time these reserves will last is important in only one respect: the longer they last, the more time we have to invent ways of living off renewable or substitute energy sources and to adjust our economy to the vast changes which we can expect from such a shift.

Fossil fuels resemble capital in a bank. A prudent and responsible parent will use his capital sparingly in order to pass on to his children as much as possible to their inheritance. A selfish and irresponsible parent will squander it in riotous living and care not one whit how his offspring will fare.

Engineers whose work familiarizes them with energy statistics, farseeing industrialists who know that energy is the principal factor which must enter into all planning for the future, responsible governments who realize that the well-being of their citizens and the political power of their countries depend on adequate energy supplies—all these have begun to be concerned about energy resources. In this country, especially, many studies have been made in the last few years seeking to discover accurate information on fossil fuel reserves and foreseeable fuel needs.

Statistics involving the human factor are, of course, never exact. The size of usable reserves depends on the ability of engineers to improve the efficiency of fuel extraction and use. It also depends on discovery of new methods to obtain energy from inferior resources at cost which can be borne without unduly depressing the standard of living. Estimates of future needs, in turn, rely heavily on population figures which must always allow for a large element of uncertainty, particularly as man reaches a point where he is more and more able to control his own way of life.

Current estimates of how long fossil fuel reserves will last vary to an astonishing degree. In part this is because the results differ greatly if cost of extraction is disregarded or if population growth is not taken into consideration, or, what is equally important, not enough weight is given to increased fuel consumption required to process inferior or substitute metals. We are rapidly approaching the time when exhaustion of better-grade metals will force us to turn to poor grades requiring in most cases greater expenditure of energy per unit of metal.

But the most significant distinction between optimistic and pessimistic fuel-reserve statistics is that the optimists generally speak of the immediate future, the next twenty-five years or so, while the pessimists think in terms of a century from now. A century, or even two, is a short span in the history of a great people. It seems sensible to me to take the long view even if this involves facing unpleasant facts.

It is an unpleasant fact that according to our best estimates total fossil fuel reserves recoverable at not more than twice today’s unit cost are likely to run out at some time between 2000 and 2050 if present standard of living and population growth rates are taken into account. Oil and natural gas will disappear first; coal last. There will be coal left in the earth, of course, but it will be so difficult to mine that energy costs would rise to economically intolerable heights, so that it would then become necessary either to discover new energy sources or drastically to lower standards of living.

For more than one hundred years we have stoked ever growing numbers of machines with coal; for fifty years we have pumped gas and oil into our factories, cars, trucks, tractors, ships, planes, and homes without giving a thought to the future. Occasionally the voice of a Cassandra has been raised only to be quickly silenced when a lucky discovery revised estimates of our oil reserves upward, or a new coal field was found in some remote spot. Few such lucky discoveries can be expected in the future, especially in industrialized countries where extensive mapping of resources has been done. Yet the popularizers of scientific news would have us believe that there is no cause for anxiety, that reserves will last thousands of years, and that before they run out science will have produced miracles. Our past history and security have given us the sentimental belief that the things we fear will never really happen—that everything turns out right in the end. But prudent men will reject these tranquilizers and prefer to face the facts so that they can plan intelligently for the needs of their posterity.

Looking into the future from the mid-twentieth century we cannot feel overly confident that present high standards of living will of a certainty continue through the next century and beyond. Fossil fuel costs will soon definitely begin to rise as the best and most accessible reserves are exhausted, and more effort will be required to obtain the same energy from remaining reserves. It is likely also that liquid fuel synthesized from coal will be more expensive. Can we feel certain that when economically recoverable fossil fuels are gone science will have learned how to maintain a high standard of living on renewable energy sources?

I believe it would be wise to assume that the principal renewable fuel sources which we can expect to tap before fossil reserves run out will supply only 7 to 15 per cent of future energy needs. The five most important of these renewable sources are wood fuel, farm wastes, wind, water power, and solar heat.

Wood-fuel and farm wastes are dubious as substitutes because of growing food requirements to be anticipated. Land is more likely to be used for food production than for tree crops; farm wastes may be more urgently needed to fertilize the soil than to fuel machines.

Wind and water power can furnish only a very small percentage of our energy needs. Moreover, as with solar energy, expensive structures would be required, making use of land and metals which will also be in short supply. Nor would anything we know today justify putting too much reliance on solar energy though it will probably prove feasible for home heating in favorable localities and for cooking in hot countries, such as India, that lack wood.

The outlook for nuclear fuels is more promising. These are not, properly speaking, renewable energy sources, at least not in the present state of technology, but their capacity to “breed” and the very high-energy output from small quantities of fissionable material, as well as the fact that such materials are relatively abundant, do seem to put nuclear fuels into a separate category from exhaustible fossil fuels. The disposal of radioactive wastes from nuclear power plants is, however, a problem which must be solved before there can be any widespread use of nuclear power.

Another limitation on the use of nuclear power is that we do not today know how to employ it other than in large units to produce electricity or to supply heating. Because of its inherent characteristics, nuclear fuel cannot be used directly in small machines, such as cars, trucks, or tractors. It is doubtful whether it could in the foreseeable future furnish economical fuel for civilian airplanes or ships, except very large ones. Rather than trying to build nuclear locomotives, we may find it more advantageous to move trains by electricity produced by nuclear central power stations. We are only at the beginning of nuclear technology, so it is difficult to predict what we may expect.

Transportation—the lifeblood of all technically advanced civilizations— seems to be assured once we have borne the initial high cost of electrifying railroads and replacing busses with streetcars or interurban electric trains. But unless science can perform the miracle of synthesizing automobile fuel from some energy source as yet unknown or unless trolley wires power electric automobiles on all streets and highways, it will be wise to face up to the possibility of the ultimate disappearance of automobiles, trucks, busses, and tractors. Before all the oil is gone and the hydrogenation of coal for synthetic liquid fuel has come to an end, the cost of automobile fuel may have risen to a point where private cars will be too expensive to run and public transportation will again become a profitable business.

Today the automobile is the most uneconomical user of energy. Its efficiency is 5 per cent compared with 23 per cent for the diesel-electric railway. It is the most ravenous devourer of fossil fuels, accounting for more than half of the total oil consumption in this country. The oil we use in the United States in one year took nature about fourteen million years to create. Curiously, the automobile, which is the greatest single cause of the rapid exhaustion of oil reserves, may eventually be the first fuel consumer to suffer. Reduction in automotive use would necessitate an extraordinarily costly reorganization of the pattern of living in industrialized nations, particularly in the United States. It would seem prudent to bear this in mind in future planning of cities and industrial locations.

Our present known reserves of fissionable materials are many times as large as our net economically recoverable reserves of coal. A point will be reached before this century is over when fossil fuel costs will have risen high enough to make nuclear fuels economically competitive. Before that time comes we shall have to make great efforts to raise our entire body of engineering and scientific knowledge to a higher plateau. We must also induce many more young Americans to become metallurgical and nuclear engineers or else we shall not have the knowledge or the trained people to build and run the nuclear power plants which ultimately may have to furnish the major part of our energy needs. If we start to plan now, we may be able to achieve the requisite level of scientific and engineering knowledge before our fossil fuel reserves give out, but the margin of safety is not large. All this is based on the assumption that atomic war can be avoided and that population growth will not exceed that now calculated by demographic experts.

War, of course, cancels all man’s expectations. Even growing world tension just short of war could have far-reaching effects. In this country it might, on the one hand, lead to greater conservation of domestic fuels, to increased oil imports, and to acceleration in scientific research which might turn up unexpected new energy sources. On the other hand, the resulting armaments race would deplete metal reserves more rapidly, hastening the day when inferior metals must be utilized with consequent greater expenditure of energy. Underdeveloped nations with fossil fuel deposits might be coerced into withholding them from the free world or may themselves decide to retain them for their own future use. The effect on Europe, which depends on coal and oil imports, would be disastrous and we would have to share our own supplies or lose our allies.

Barring atomic war or unexpected changes in the population curve, we can count on an increase in world population from 2.5 billion in 1950 to between 4 and 5 billion in the year 2000; 6 and 8 billion by 2050. The United States grows at the same annual rate as the world as a whole—1.7 per cent. In fact, the world did not catch up with us until 1957. Surprising as it may sound, we may expect to have a population equal to that of India today (392 million) in just fifty years, and of present-day China (628 million) in but eighty years.

It is an awesome thing to contemplate a graph of world population growth from pre-historic times—tens of thousands of years ago—to the day after tomorrow—let us say the year A.D. 2000. If we visualize the population curve as a road that starts at sea level and rises in proportion as world population increases and if, furthermore, we let one mile represent one year in the history of mankind, we should get this picture: the road would stretch endlessly almost level for 99 per cent of the time that man has inhabited the earth. Then in 6000 B.C., when history may be said to have begun, we see the road running at roof-top level of a six-story apartment house (seventy feet). From here it ascends almost imperceptibly for 7,000 miles to a level that would correspond to twice the height of a skyscraper (1,600 feet). The gradation now becomes steeper and in the next 400 miles the road reaches a height (2,900 feet) corresponding to three times that of the Eiffel Tower. In the last 400 miles of this very long journey the road suddenly turns sharply upward at an almost perpendicular inclination and goes straight up to an elevation of 29,000 feet—the height of Mount Everest, the world’s tallest mountain.

In the 8,000 years from the beginning of recorded history to the year A.D. 2000 world population will thus have grown from 10 million to 4 billion,[5] with 90 per cent of the growth taking place during the last 5 percent of that period, that is, in four hundred years. It took three thousand years to accomplish the first doubling of population, one hundred years for the last doubling, but the next doubling will require only forty years.

The rapidity of population growth has not given us enough time to readjust our thinking. A century and a half ago our country was a wilderness in which a pioneer could find complete freedom from men and from government. If things became too crowded—if he saw his neighbor’s chimney smoke—he could, and often did, pack up and move West. For much of our history we were a vast country with too few people to bring it under cultivation. We conserved what was scarce—human labor—and squandered what seemed abundant—natural resources—and we are still doing the same today.

Much of the wilderness that nurtured what is most dynamic in the American character is now buried under cities, factories, and suburban developments where each picture window looks out on nothing more inspiring than the neighbor’s back yard with the smoke of his fire in the wire basket clearly visible. Life in crowded communities cannot be the same as life on the frontier. We are no longer free, as was the pioneer, to work for our own immediate needs regardless of the future. We are no longer as independent of men and of government as were Americans two and three generations ago. An ever larger share of what we earn must go to pay for services caused by crowded living—bigger governments; bigger city, state, and federal budgets to pay for more public services. Merely to supply us with enough water and to carry our waste products gets daily more difficult and expensive. More laws and law-enforcement agencies are needed now to regulate human relations in urban industrial communities and on crowded highways than in the America of Thomas Jefferson. Certainly no one likes taxes, but we must become reconciled to larger taxes in the larger America of tomorrow.

I suggest that this is a good time to think soberly about our responsibilities to our descendants—those who will ring out the Fossil Fuel Age. Our greatest responsibility, as parents and citizens, is to give America’s youngsters the best possible education. We need the best teachers and enough of them to prepare our young people for a future immeasurably more complex than the present, and calling for ever larger numbers of competent and highly trained men and women. This means that we must not delay building more schools, colleges, and playgrounds. It means that we must reconcile ourselves to continuing higher taxes to build up and maintain at decent salaries a greatly enlarged corps of much better trained teachers, even at the cost of denying ourselves such momentary pleasures as buying a bigger new car, or a TV set, or a household gadget. We should find, I believe, that these small self-denials would be more than offset by the benefits they would buy for tomorrow’s America. We might even, if we wanted to, give a break to these youngsters by cutting fuel and metal consumption a little here and there so as to provide a safer margin for the necessary adjustments which eventually must be made in a world without fossil fuels.

There is also another thing to consider: high-energy consumption has always been a prerequisite of political power. The tendency is for political power to be concentrated in an ever smaller number of countries. Ultimately, the nation that controls the largest energy resources will become dominant. If we give thought to the problem of energy resources, if we act wisely and in time to conserve what we have and prepare well for necessary future changes, we shall insure this dominant position for our own country.





FIFTEEN: A HUMANISTIC TECHNOLOGY[1]





This chapter was originally presented at a dinner during the Symposium on Cybernetics and Society at Georgetown University in November 1964; it was also published in American Behavioral Scientist in 1965. The invitation to speak at an academic symposium on an esoteric subject outside of his expertise in practical engineering is an indication of Rickover’s influence on our society in the 1960s. This chapter provides some of Rickover’s earliest thoughts on the importance of applying objective morals in a democratic political process to ensure that technology benefits all.





By boring into the secrets of nature scientists have discovered keys that will unlock powerful forces which are then put to practical use by technology. The apparatus we have set up to utilize these forces is now so huge, so complex, so difficult for laymen to understand that by its very magnitude it threatens to dwarf man himself. The threat does not inhere in the apparatus itself—technology is neutral. It lies in ourselves, in the way we look at technology, for this determines what we do with it.

My plea is for a humanistic attitude toward technology. By this I mean that we recognize it as a product of human effort, a product serving no other purpose than to benefit man—man in general, not merely some men; man in totality of his humanity, encompassing all his manifold interests and needs, not merely some one particular concern of his. Humanistically viewed, technology is not an end in itself but a means to an end, the end being determined by man.

Technology is nothing but tools, techniques, procedures; the artifacts fashioned by modern industrial man to increase his powers of mind and body. Marvelous as they are, we must not let ourselves be overawed by these artifacts. They certainly do not dictate how we should use them; nor by their mere existence do they authorize actions that were not anteriorly lawful. We alone must decide how technology is to be used and we alone are responsible for the consequences. In this as in all our actions we are bound by the principles that govern human behavior and human relations in our society.

This needs stressing for there is a widespread notion that, since technology has wrought vast changes in our lives, traditional concepts of ethics and morals are now obsolete. Why should the fact that technology makes it possible to relieve mankind of much brutal, exhausting physical labor and boring routine work affect precepts that have guided Western man for centuries? This may brand me as old-fashioned but I have not yet found occasion to discard a single principle that was accepted in the America of my youth. Why should anyone feel in need of a new ethical code because he has become richer or healthier or has more leisure? Does it make sense to abandon rules one has lived by because one has acquired more efficient tools? Tools are for utilizing the external resources at our disposal; principles are for marshaling our inner, our human resources. With tools we can alter our physical environment; principles serve to order our personal life and our relations with others. The two have nothing to do with each other.

It disturbs me to be told that technology “demands” some action the speaker favors, or that “you can’t stop progress.” It troubles me that we are so easily pressured by purveyors of technology into permitting so-called “progress” to alter our lives, without attempting to control this development— as if technology were an irrepressible force of nature to which we must meekly submit. If we reflected we might discover that much that is hailed as progress contributes little or nothing to human happiness. Not everything new is eo ipso good, nor everything old out-of-date.

Perhaps what makes us receptive to these arguments is our tendency to confuse technology with science. Not only in popular thinking but even among well-informed persons the two are not always clearly distinguished. Characteristics pertaining to science are often attributed to technology. The etymology of the word may have some bearing on this confusion. Its suffix lends to technology a false aura—as if it signified a body of accumulated, systematized knowledge—when in fact the term refers to the apparatus through which knowledge is put to practical use. The difference is important.

Science, as I hardly need tell this audience, has to do with discovering the true facts and relationships of observable phenomena in nature, and with establishing theories that serve to organize masses of verified data concerning these facts and relationships. Julian Huxley said that scientific laws and concepts are “organized creations of the human mind, by means of which the disorderly raw material of natural phenomena presented to crude experience is worked into orderly and manageable forms.”

Because of the extraordinary care with which scientists verify the facts supporting their theories, and the readiness with which they alter theories when new facts prove an old established theory to be imperfect, science has immense authority. What the scientific community accepts as proven is not debatable; it must be accepted. No one argues that the earth ought to attract the moon, or that atomic fission ought not to produce energy.

Technology cannot claim the authority of science. It is properly a subject of debate, not only by experts in the field but by the public as well. In every field of knowledge, application of human use of scientific theories and axioms has proved anything but infallibly beneficial; in fact much harm has been done. We have yet to devise methods for testing the safety and usefulness of a given technology that would in any way be comparable to the methods by which science tests its hypotheses.

The forces put to work by technology should be handled with greater care than is presently the case. We have been remiss in failing to insist that no one be allowed to manage a technology who does not have the requisite competence. Further, anyone making a faulty decision which causes damage to others should be held responsible. As it is, many are now making technological decisions who are not capable—even if they would—of assessing the consequences of their decisions. Too often these are made on the basis of short-range, private interests with no regard for the interests of others or the possibilities of harmful long-range side effects. A certain ruthlessness is encouraged by the mistaken belief that to disregard human considerations is as necessary in technology as it is in science. The analogy is false.

The methods of science require rigorous exclusion of the human factor. They were developed to serve the needs of scientists whose sole interest is to comprehend the universe; to know the truth; to know it accurately and with certainty. The searcher for truth cannot pay attention to his own or other people’s likes and dislikes, or to popular ideas of the fitness of things. This is why science is the very antithesis of “humanistic,” despite the fact that historically modern science developed out of and parallel to the humanism of the Renaissance.

What scientists discover may shock or anger people—as did Galileo’s discovery that the earth circles the sun, or Darwin’s theory of evolution. But even an unpleasant truth is worth having; besides one can always choose not to believe it! It is otherwise with technology. Science, being pure thought, harms no one; it need not therefore be humanistic. But technology is action, and thus potentially dangerous. Unless it adapts itself to human interests, needs, values, and principles, i.e., unless it is humanistic, technology will do more harm than good. For by enlarging man’s power of mind and body, it enhances his ability to do good. Never in all his long life on earth has man possessed such enormous power to injure fellow human beings and society. Neither public opinion nor the law have caught up with his new destructive potential, which is why perpetrators of technological damage often as not escape with impunity.

That a humanistic technology is within the bounds of the attainable is proved by medicine. The practicing physician’s technology is permeated by the humanistic spirit; it is centered on man. No one is allowed to practice medicine who has not given proof of his technical competence. The profession operates under a code of ethics which requires physicians to place the human needs of patients above all other considerations. On graduation from medical school they swear an oath incorporating this ethical code—an oath formulated two and a half millennia ago by the Greek physician Hippocrates.





TENSION WITHIN THE ALTRUISTIC IDEAL

We owe to Greece the noble idea that knowledge ought to be used humanistically, instead of for personal aggrandizement of power, or as a means of extracting maximum gain from people who are in need of the services of men possessing special knowledge. It was a novel idea at the time, and remains unknown to this day in many regions of the world— witness the fear in which medicine men are commonly held because of their notorious abuses of power. Even among the people of Western civilization, the precept is rarely followed outside medicine and a few other professions. Most human affairs are conducted on the old Roman maxim of caveat emptor.

Pursuant to the Greek ideal, the tradition in Europe has been to restrict the practice of medicine to persons who not only are competent in the specialty but who are also broadly or humanistically educated. Hence the requirement that before they begin their medical studies future physicians must obtain the baccalaureate that comes at the end of the exacting course of a classical or semiclassical gymnasium or lycée—a course deemed to nurture better than any other those qualities of breadth of mind and depth of character that are prerequisites of humanistic attitude.

This, of course, prolongs the time it takes to become a physician and increases the cost. During the past century it was widely felt in our country that this was “undemocratic.” So young men were allowed to enter medical school directly from high school. But eventually we followed the example of Europe, realizing that if medicine is to be of greatest service to mankind it must be practiced as a humanistic profession. Since we have nothing in our public school system comparable to the humanistic gymnasium or lycée, we require that before being admitted to medical school students obtain a bachelor’s degree from a liberal arts college—the nearest American equivalent to the European baccalaureate.

I should like to see a similar requirement set up by engineering schools. They are now, in most cases, mere trade schools—though often excellent in their narrow field. Even schools that find room in their crowded curriculum for humanities courses cannot make up for the deficiencies in the American high school. We have no alternative but to demand completion of a liberal arts college course if we want future professionals to be broadly and liberally educated before they specialize for their particular career.

I have long believed that engineering should be practiced as a humanistic profession, that engineers should be humanistically or liberally educated persons. This would bring us appreciably closer to a humanistic technology, not only because it would broaden the engineer’s vision but because it would raise his professional status. This is particularly important today when most engineers work in large bureaucratic organizations—private and public— where professional judgment has difficulty making itself felt against the autocratic fiat of higher administrative officials. If the technical advice of engineers is to count, they must attain a professional status comparable to that of physicians.

I speak of this with feeling. As you know, my work is in one of the new technologies—one that is dangerous unless properly handled. I am frequently faced with the difficulty of convincing administrative superiors that it is not safe for them to overrule their technical experts. Here is a case in point.

A superior once asked me to reduce radiation shielding in our nuclear submarines. He said the advantage of getting a lighter-weight reactor plant was worth risking the health of personnel. It was not possible to make him see that such a concept could not be accepted; that, moreover, where radiation is involved, we are dealing with not just with the lives of present day individuals but with the genetic future of all mankind. His attitude was that we did not know much about evolution and if we raised radiation exposures we might find the resulting mutations to be beneficial—that mankind might “learn to live with radiation.”

In a humanistic technology the desire to obtain maximum benefits is subordinated to the obligation not to injure human beings or society at large. Technological decisions must be made by competent and responsible persons who know that nature will strike back if her categorical imperatives are disregarded. We need, for technology as a whole, a system comparable to the one in medicine which guards against practices that, while doubtless profitable to the practitioner, would be harmful to those who suffer the consequences; in other words, we need professionalization of the decisionmaking process.





INCREASING ORGANIZATION

Most technological decisions are made by large organizations. Their custom of exalting the “pure” administrator above the technical expert, even in technical matters, needs to be changed. For in our country we do not make it mandatory that administrators have technical competence; their métier is to rule organizations. Living in hierarchies, they are accustomed to giving and obeying orders; they expect, and they give, unquestioned obedience to superiors. This offers little room for personal judgment based on knowledge and expertise. Professional persons, on the other hand, are trained to act in professional matters on their own judgment, no matter what their position in the organization. They also place the ethical code of their profession above the interests of their employer. We would be well advised to ponder whether we ought not insist on professionals participating on an equal basis in the decision making process whenever a technology is potentially dangerous.

This brings me to a final and important question: Can we handle technology in such a way that it will not distort our free society? Does our political system provide means to control the new power complexes that have arisen as a consequence of technology? Can we make certain that these do not diminish the autonomous individual on whom our system pivots; that they do not by reason of their overwhelming power pervert the democratic process?

This is so large a subject that I can only touch upon a few aspects that seem to me important. Let me say at once that if ours is to remain a society of free men, technology must be made humanistic. Men will not retain their liberty unless their society is totally committed to the belief that “man is the measure of all things” (Protagoras) and to the maxim that “man is an end in himself” and must not be used “as a mere means for some external purpose” (Kant).

In essence, what we face is a modern version of an age-old problem that keeps reappearing: how to reconcile liberty and civilization. We shall understand the present-day version better if we know something about the 18th century version which occupied the thoughts of the Founding Fathers. This is how they saw it and ultimately solved it brilliantly—for their time.

They were men of the Enlightenment—that last phase of the Renaissance when men turned once more for inspiration to the classical world as they mounted an attack on every custom and institution that shackles the mind of man or arbitrarily restrains his action—from superstition to class privilege, from tyranny by an established church to tyranny by an absolute monarch. The central problem agitating the thinkers of the Age of Reason was how to limit power so that men may be free. They saw more clearly than anyone before or since that it was civilization—life in civilized society—which created the problem. Savages knew how to remain free, but when men lived in civilized society their social needs generated power which in the end suppressed their liberties.

Though separated by the Atlantic from the center of all this intellectual ferment, the founders of our nation were a part of it. Unlike the European philosophers, who were merely theorizing about a possible resolution of the antitheses between individual liberty and organized society, the Founding Fathers were looking for a practical solution; they were first-rate thinkers, but also experienced politicians. Their great achievement was to have recognized that on this rich, empty, newly colonized American continent a new type of self-reliant man, a new type of basically egalitarian society had come into being, and that a unique opportunity thus offered itself to establish here the Utopia the philosophers were dreaming about: a country where all men would be free to manage their personal lives, where the law recognized no special privilege or handicap, where government would be the servant, not the master of the people. With consummate skill they devised a political system combining maximum protection of individual liberty with adequate provision for the proper governance of a civilized society. Hamilton called the Constitution a happy mean between “the energy of government and the security of private rights.”





PRIVATE RIGHTS AND PUBLIC DUTY

The founders achieved their purpose by making consent of the people indispensable to the functioning of government—in other words, by associating the citizen with the business of governing. In an oversimplified way, one could say that the individual in our society is a person with private rights and public duties; he safeguards his private liberties by conscientiously attending to his public responsibilities.

The fundamental tenets of our political system are to be found in the Declaration of Independence, the machinery putting them into effect in the Constitution. Familiarity with these great documents, and with the Federalist which elucidates their meaning, is as essential to a strong democratic faith as is the Bible to religious faith. We must know them well enough to be able to distinguish clearly between tenet and technique, between principle and procedure. For in order to preserve our free society we have to adjust techniques and procedures to changes in the conditions of life in order that they may be kept effective, while holding on to the basic tenets or principles that make ours a free, democratic society.

The Declaration of Independence enumerates three fundamental principles in the following order of precedence: first, men are born equally endowed with certain rights that are “inalienable”; second, governments are established to “secure” these rights; and third, government derives its “just powers” from the consent of the governed. Clearly the intent of the founders was that Americans were to be forever secure in the rights that make men free and, being free, capable of exercising control over their government; that never would they be ruled by anyone who had not received a public mandate and was not accountable to the people for his actions.

The founders were well aware that democracy is the most difficult form of government. They knew that to make a success of it, a people must have political sagacity as well as what the ancients called “public virtues”—a combination of independence, self-reliance and readiness to assume civic responsibilities. But they felt that Americans possessed these qualities; that, indeed, the condition of life in America developed just the type of man who would know how to make democracy work.

Among the advantages favoring a workable democracy, the founders counted the fact that Americans were for the most part independent farmers, artisans and merchants. Being used to managing their own business, such men would, they felt, know how to manage the nation. A scarce population and the immense wealth of the country in land and other resources would prevent formation of a propertyless class dependent on others for employment. The political equality basic to our system of government would thus be firmly supported by real equality among our people. The founders were convinced there would be free land for generations and generations to come; they could not have envisioned a hundredfold population increase in but two centuries. That seventy per cent of our people now live in urban conglomerations would have horrified them; they judged Europe’s propertyless urban masses unfit to govern themselves! To them America’s unique advantages were a guarantee of success for their political experiment. They felt that the land, the people and the political system were made for each other.

These special advantages are nearly all gone now. They began to disappear with the coming to our shores of the Industrial Revolution roughly a century ago; we are losing them at an accelerated rate since the full impact of the Scientific Revolution hit us about two decades ago. Directly or indirectly it has been the new technology these revolutions brought into being that altered the pattern of national life in ways that are detrimental to the democratic process. The many benefits we gain through technology come at a cost.

Let me briefly run over some of the advantages we have lost. Free land is gone and we now have an excess, not a scarcity, of people as measured by available jobs. The self-employed have dwindled to ten per cent of the working population and grow fewer each year; the solid and real property, which once gave Americans what Socrates called a “private station” from which to exercise their rights as citizens, has been replaced by masses of possessions being paid for on the installment plan. It was Kenneth Galbraith, I believe, who noted that the average family is three weeks from bankruptcy, should the breadwinner lose his job.

Early visitors to America were amazed that we had neither paupers nor very rich men; we now have both. The richest one per cent of our population owns twenty-eight per cent of the national wealth; the poorest ten per cent owns but one per cent. The gap is greater here than in many democracies abroad. We have some of the worst slums; one fourth to one fifth of our people live in want; and a substantial percentage are so poorly educated that we can find no jobs they are able to fill.

With the closing of the frontier a way of life came to an end which was simple and uncomplicated and therefore comprehensible to everyone. To make the wilderness habitable took a vast amount of rough work, so there was always demand for the kind of labor most people are able to perform. One needed little book learning to be successful in life. Men were scarce so they felt needed and therefore important. Public issues could be understood by ordinary men; de Tocqueville was astounded by the lively interest in politics he found here. “If an American were condemned to confine his activity to his own affairs, he would be robbed of one half of his existence,” he wrote in the 1830’s.

What changed all this was technology. The technical level of a society always determines the range of occupational skills that are in demand. In pre-industrial America, this range corresponded closely to the actual capabilities of our people. Today it is at odds with what one might call the natural range of competences. While men worked much harder in the past to earn a living, they needed much less formal schooling. Many people find it difficult or impossible to meet educational requirements that are indispensable at the present level of technology. The minimum now is a high school diploma. Though this is a modest level of education, nearly half our youth fail to achieve it. Yet it is not too much to ask; it is no more than is asked of workingmen in other advanced industrial countries.

To function properly in his environment a worker now needs to be a human being with a good basic education; he must certainly be wholly literate and what the English call numerate. Uneducated workers are a positive menace in complex industrial installations. Time and again I have seen production schedules delayed, countless hours of labor by highly skilled scientists and engineers brought to nothing, thousands of dollars’ damage done by a single careless act of an uneducated worker.





CONCLUSION

Though we save ourselves much unpleasant labor by means of technology, we have to exert ourselves more than in the past to reach the competences required of all who are involved with technology. If as I said before, decision makers now should have a liberal education as well as professional competence, so must workers have a basic education in addition to their specific vocational skill. This is the price we have to pay for the many good things technology can provide.

But the raising of educational levels is not limited to job requirements. It is also essential to the discharge of our responsibilities as democratic citizens. Where in the past, life itself developed in most Americans the wisdom and experience they needed to reach intelligent opinions on public issues and to choose wisely among candidates for public office, we must today acquire this competence largely through studies that many people do not find particularly congenial. Yet unless one understands the world he lives in, including issues requiring political solutions, he is not a productive, contributing member of society. Uneducated citizens are potentially as dangerous to the proper functioning of our democratic institutions as are uneducated workers when they handle complicated machinery.

Paradoxically, liberal education which at one time we tended to regard as “aristocratic” is the very kind of education we now need most to preserve our “democratic” way of life. Since it seeks to develop all the potentialities of the individual, not merely those he needs to earn a living, liberal or humanistic education shapes or forms him into a more capable, a more observant, a more discriminating human being. This he needs to be if he is to cope with the huge public and private power conglomerates that now dominate our society and interpose themselves between the American people and the men elected to public office, making it increasingly difficult for the popular will to assert itself whenever it goes counter to the interests of larger organizations.

This is particularly serious when the people find they must call on their government to protect them against misuse of technology by one or another of these large organizations. So great is the power of these organizations that normally the interest of the sovereign people in getting protective laws enacted and enforced does not carry as much weight as the interest of organizations in continuing their harmful practices. Often something in the nature of a catastrophe which causes a public outcry will alone get action. The tragic case of the Thalidomide babies comes to mind. One could cite numerous examples of delayed or emasculated legislation and of inadequate enforcement of existing laws—for instance, against sale of foods and drugs containing ingredients not properly tested for side effects; against dangerous pesticides and weed killers which poison fish, plants and wildlife, and upset the ecological balance of nature; against air and water pollution, etc.

The problem of how to limit power so men may be free is perennial and cumulative. No sooner is society organized to control one kind of power, than new ones appear, ranging themselves alongside the old power. The founders of our nation solved the problem as it then existed, i.e., they limited the power wielded by government. Our problem is additionally to prevent the power of bureaucratic organizations from being used in ways that diminish individual liberty and undermine the democratic process. If we succeed in this we shall benefit from technology without having to sacrifice our precious heritage—freedom.





SIXTEEN: LIBERTY, SCIENCE AND LAW[1]





This chapter was originally presented to the Newcomen Society of America on January 16, 1969, when Admiral Rickover was given the 1968 Newcomen Medal. The Newcomen Society promotes the history of engineering and technology. This speech was a call for engineers to consider the effect of their work on the future conditions of life and to recognize the necessity that the electorate has the right and obligation to restrain technology by law when deemed necessary.





To be a recipient of the award established in Thomas Newcomen’s name moves me deeply.

I was honored and pleased when I learned you considered my work worthy of the ideals of the Newcomen Gold Medal, and of the high standards you established in selecting my distinguished predecessors. It gave me a special sense of satisfaction that could hardly be matched by any other recognition.

I have always felt that in honoring a person we must remember that all human achievement flows not only from individual effort but from associative effort as well. We, the living, are heirs to all the ideas and accomplishments of every human being who has ever lived. Nowhere is this more true than in the never ending quest for new knowledge, and for new ways to put this knowledge to practical use. By its very nature, this is a cooperative endeavor.

When I began my work in nuclear power a couple of decades ago, I was motivated by the belief that I might make a modest contribution. If I have made such a contribution in the past, I only hope I can add meaningfully to it over the coming years, and thereby more fully merit the honor you have so graciously bestowed on me tonight.

In casting about for a proper subject for this evening, I noted that the study of material history and law are among the purposes of The Newcomen Society. Since this meeting is being held in Philadelphia, birthplace of our Constitution—the document which defines and guarantees our liberty—I thought it would be fitting to speak on LIBERTY, SCIENCE AND LAW. I use the term science in its broad connotation which includes engineering and technology. My object is to show the implications of scientific and technological developments for human rights and fundamental freedom.

In 1966 I had the honor and privilege of addressing the Athens Meeting of the Royal National Foundation in Greece. I spoke on the Hill of the Pnyx, the place where the ancient Ecclesia had its seat, where men first practiced the difficult art of self-government, succeeding brilliantly for a time, but failing in the end. Our country, as you know, picked up the torch of liberty they had lighted and established the first representative democracy in modern times, even as Athens had established the first direct democracy in all history.

Twenty-four centuries separated these two great innovative acts in time, over five thousand miles in space. One took place in a small city-state possessing few material resources, the other in a huge country of great natural wealth. Yet there is a close inner link between them. They had the same objective. The principles they adopted to achieve their purpose were similar. Both sought to create—and did create—the political framework for a society of free men.

The framers of the American Constitution of 1789 drew upon Greek political theory and practice, adopting what had proved successful, ingeniously improving where the earlier structure had shown weakness.

They were men of the Enlightenment, when classical rationalism sparked a new Age of Reason throughout the western world; when philosophers were inspired to mount an attack on every custom and institution that shackles the mind of man and arbitrarily restrains his actions—from superstition to class privilege, from tyranny by an established church to tyranny by a secular autocrat. The political institutions of all the nations of the free world today— beginning with ours—had their inception in the turmoil of that last phase of the Renaissance.

Western civilization is set apart from civilizations elsewhere, both past and present, by its dynamism, its extraordinary creativity, its intense preoccupation with things of the mind. All this started with the Renaissance. Not until modern western man rediscovered and retrieved his classical heritage did he begin to outstrip the rest of the world.

To borrow a Churchillian phrase, it can be said of Athens, of Greece in general, that never before or since did so few human beings leave so deep and lasting an imprint on so many others, differing in race and faith, distant in time and space from this cradle of western civilization. Their mark is on all our science, our art, architecture, literature, theater, and on our political thinking and practice as well. The Athenians proved that free men could govern themselves; that it was possible to live in a civilized society without having to relinquish personal freedom.

This was an epochal achievement. In all his long life on earth, man has had but brief moments of freedom. His own nature is the cause of the paradoxical situation that civilization and liberty are interdependent, yet at the same time antithetical. One cannot be had without the other, yet reconciling them remains to this day what it has always been—the most difficult political, social, and economic problem.

Civilization and liberty are interdependent because basic to freedom is exercise of mind and spirit, of the faculties that set us apart from other living things and make us fully human. For this there must be a modicum of leisure which comes only with civilization, when men no longer need devote all their time and energy to appeasement of hunger and protection against the elements—as must the animals.

But release from endless toil for mere survival does not automatically set men free. Indeed, the very opportunity to cultivate the mind and spirit which civilization opens to man lies at the root of the antithesis between civilization and liberty, for this opportunity is not seized to the same degree by everyone.

Always and everywhere, civilization results in much greater enlargement of the scope of human thought and action among the minority possessing high intelligence than among the majority of average people. Nature endows men with unequal capacity for acquiring knowledge and competence. More so in the realm of the intellect, which is all-important in civilized life, than in the realm of physical strength and courage, which counts most in primitive society. Men become, as it were, more unequal as civilization advances.

Life grows complex, harder to understand for ordinary people, demanding competencies many are unable to acquire. In understanding and competence, the gifted swiftly forge ahead. What they achieve is beyond the capacity of the average. The result is that men grow apart, their interests diverge. Society tends to divide into segments according to superiority of competence or superiority of number. The temptation is great for each segment to use the power its particular superiority confers to bend the whole society to its will, thus putting an end to freedom.

The Athenians were first to devise a political system that preserved the citizen’s liberty by counteracting the natural human inequalities which are the root cause of segmented power centers. The basic principles of their system remain to this day the best protection of individual freedom. Government of the people, by the people, and for the people was their great invention; political equality their crowning achievement. They inaugurated the reign of mind over force by providing for resolution of differences in point of view and interest through public dialogue leading to consensus, instead of by the exercise of power. Perhaps the most remarkable feature of their polity was that it engaged the continuous participation in public business of a large part of the citizenry—somewhere between one fifth and one fourth at any given time. It was obvious to them that only when the people are personally involved with their government will public officials be responsive to the popular will. Citizens who shunned public service were called idiotes and considered useless; in some cases, failure to do one’s public duty resulted in loss of civil rights.

To quote Edith Hamilton, the American classicist who was made an honorary citizen of Athens, “the idea of the Athenian state was a union of individuals free to develop their own powers and live their own way, obedient only to the laws they passed themselves and could criticize and change at will.” This is the political ideal that to western man spells liberty and that is rejected in toto by all autocracies, modern as well as ancient.

The Greeks, I think, understood better than most of us what it means to be free. In his play, The Persians, Aeschylus who fought at Marathon puts his finger unerringly on what distinguished free Greece from unfree Persia. He has the Queen of Persia ask about the Athenians: “Who is their master?” To which she received the answer, “they are not subject to any man”; they obey only the law. When she is told of her son’s defeat, the Queen remarks: “Even if he fails, there is no law can call him to account.” How better could one express the contrast between the protagonists in today’s cold war?

Liberty, never gained without enormous effort and sacrifice, is all too easily lost. Those who enslave their own people seem irresistibly driven to extinguish freedom everywhere. When we understand them, we are better prepared to ward off their aggression. More important still is awareness of the forces within free societies that endanger liberty. In both respects, there is still much we can learn from the Athenians.

Liberty is never gained for once and for all. Each generation must win it anew. Each must defend it against new perils. These perils arise because men, being endowed with free will, continually alter the conditions of life.

Countless decisions made in pursuit of private objectives may so transform society that institutional safeguards once adequately protecting human liberty become ineffective. It is then necessary to return to first principles and to adapt them to altered circumstances.

The title of this speech—LIBERTY, SCIENCE AND LAW—expresses my conviction that unless certain practices in the technological exploitation of scientific knowledge are restrained by law, they will cost us our liberties.

Science and technology are, of course, of immense benefit to man. But they may bring about changes in our physical environment of greatest potential danger. Certain technologies admittedly injure man, society, and nature. Yet, even in countries where the people are sovereign and where they recognize the danger, efforts to bring these technologies under social control have had little success. Those who have the use of technology are powerful enough to prevent legal restraint, the main prop of their power being the esoteric character of modern science.

Much of it is incomprehensible even to intelligent and educated laymen. When scientific-technological considerations enter into public issues—as is often the case today—the issues cannot be understood by the electorate, frequently not even by the public officials who are directly concerned. There is then no recourse but to call on scientists for expert advice. In effect, the issue will be decided by them, yet they have not been elected, nor are they accountable to the people. What is left of self-government when public policy no longer reflects public consensus? And, when the public finds that it cannot judge and evaluate issues involving science, will it not become apathetic toward all public issues? Does this not spell the doom of selfgovernment, hence of freedom for modern man? Though all the institutions established to safeguard his liberties may remain intact, the substance of freedom will have been lost.

By one of those ironies of fate beloved by Greek dramatists, this new threat to liberty has its source in the noblest Greek achievement, the freeing of the human mind to roam at will in pursuit of truth and knowledge. All things are to be examined and called into question, said the Greeks. Unless men understood the world in which they lived, and because of this understanding felt at home in it and could be useful citizens, they were not truly free. Never before or since was intellectual freedom valued so greatly. “All things were in chaos when mind arose and made order,” said Anaxagoras, the mathematician and astronomer.

When Renaissance man recovered his classical heritage, the most precious treasure he found was freedom of the mind. With his mental powers set free, it took him but three and a half centuries to build on foundations laid in classical Greece the whole magnificent edifice of modern science. No one could have foreseen that in its ultimate consequences the Scientific Revolution might diminish human liberty.

But it has brought us back full circle. Science—the vital area of knowledge today—is for the most of us virtually a closed book; again it had become the monopoly of a small elite. This is not the fault of the scientist. Unlike ancient priesthoods, they have no wish to bar others from knowledge or to use it to enslave the ignorant. Many scientists make strenuous efforts to explain science to the lay public. Nevertheless, we find ourselves in much the same position as the ancient Egyptians whose very lives depended on knowing when the waters of the Nile would rise and fall—knowledge possessed by their priesthood alone.

As in the past, it is not the knowledge gap per se that is most detrimental to freedom, not the fact that the majority cannot follow scholars in the realm of higher mathematics and science; rather it is the effect ignorance of science has on public attitudes toward science and science-based technology. The impact of technology, in particular, on the individual and on society at large is profoundly affected by prevailing concepts of what technology is and what purpose it should serve.

If people understood that technology is the creation of man, therefore subject to human control, they would demand that it be used to produce maximum benefit and do minimum harm to individuals and to the values that make for civilized living. Unfortunately, there is a tendency in contemporary thinking to ascribe to technology a momentum of its own, placing it beyond human direction or restraint—a tendency more pronounced in some countries but observable wherever there is rapid technological progress.

It manifests itself in such absurd statements as that technology demands some action the speaker favor, or that “you can’t stop progress.” Personalizing abstractions is a favorite means of semantic misdirection; it gives an air of authority to dubious statements. Most people are easily pressured by purveyors of technology into permitting so-called progress to alter their lives, without attempting to control it—as if they had to submit meekly to whatever is technically feasible. If they reflected, they would discover that not everything hailed as progress contributes to happiness; that the new is not always better, nor the old always outdated.

The notion is also widespread that, having wrought vast changes in the material conditions of life, technology perforce renders obsolete traditional concepts of ethics and morals, as well as accustomed ways of arranging political and social relationships. Earnest debates are currently taking place whether it is possible to act morally in the new technological society, and proposals have been made—quite seriously—that science must now replace traditional ethics! We have here a confusion that must be cleared up.

Through technology we are relieved of much brutal, exhausting, physical labor as well as boring routine work; we are provided with numerous mechanical servants who do certain kinds of work faster, cheaper, and more efficiently than people. Why should the ease and affluence technology makes possible affect moral precepts that have guided western man for ages? This may brand me as old-fashioned but I have not yet found occasion to discard a single principle that was accepted in the America of my youth.

Technology is tools, techniques, procedures, things; the artifacts fashioned by modern industrial man to increase his powers of mind and body. Marvelous as they are, let us not be overawed by these artifacts. Certainly they do not dictate how we should use them nor, by their mere existence, do they authorize actions that were not anteriorly lawful. We alone bear responsibility for our technology. In this, as in all our actions, we are bound by the principles governing human behavior in our society.

Does it make sense to abandon principles one has lived by because he has acquired better tools? Tools are for utilizing the external resources at our disposal; principles are for marshaling our inner, our human resources. Tools enable us to alter our physical environment; principles serve to order our personal life and our relations with others. The two have nothing to do with each other.

This should be obvious, but erroneous concepts of science and technology abound because people tend to confuse the two. Not only in popular thinking but even among the well-informed, science and technology are not always clearly distinguished. Characteristics pertaining to science are frequently attributed to technology, even as science itself is confounded with ethics.

Science has to do with discovering the true facts and relationships of observable phenomena in nature, and with establishing theories that serve to organize masses of verified data concerning these facts and relationships. By boring into the secrets of nature, scientists discover keys that unlock powerful forces which can be made to serve man. It is through technology that these forces are then put to human use.

Science is a body of systematized knowledge; technology is the apparatus through which knowledge is put to practical use. The difference is important.

Because of the care scientists take to verify the facts supporting their theories, and their readiness to alter theories when new facts prove them imperfect, science has acquired great authority. What the scientific community accepts as proven is not questioned by the public. No one disputes that the earth circles the sun, or that atomic fission produces energy.

Technology cannot claim the authority of science and is therefore properly a subject of debate, not alone by experts but by the public as well. Little thought is customarily given to the possibility of harmful aftereffects by those responsible for technological exploitation of scientific knowledge. In consequence, technology has proved anything but infallibly beneficial. Indeed, much damage has been done because no thought was given to the interaction of technology with nature. More on this presently.

A certain ruthlessness is encouraged, in the mistaken belief that to disregard human considerations is as necessary in technology as it is in science. The analogy is false.

Rigorous exclusion of the human factor is required by the methods of science. These were developed to serve the needs of the scientist, whose sole interest is to comprehend the universe; to know the truth; to know it accurately and with certainty. The searcher for truth cannot pay attention to his own or other people’s likes and dislikes, or to popular ideas of the fitness of things. What he discovers may shock or anger people—as did Darwin’s theory of evolution. But even an unpleasant truth is worth having; besides one can choose not to believe it! Science, being pure thought, harms no one.

Technology, on the other hand, is action, often potentially dangerous action. Never has man possessed such enormous power to injure his fellow humans and his society as has been put into his hands by modern technology. This is why technology can have no legitimate purpose but to serve man—man in general, not merely some men; future generations, not merely those who currently wish to gain advantage for themselves; man in the totality of his humanity, encompassing all his manifold interests and needs, not merely some one particular concern. Technology is not an end in itself; it is a means to an end, the end being determined by man himself in accordance with the laws prevailing in his society.

A word may be in order concerning the disparate meaning of the term law, depending on whether it is used in the ordinary sense—which is also the original sense of the word—or by scientists.

Law, as commonly understood, refers to those rules of human conduct prescribed and enforced by society. Its purpose is to resolve human conflicts by the application of definitive rules. These rules are always debatable and can be changed when there is demand for a change.

The scientists have appropriated the term law to describe regularities exhibited by physical phenomena—the rules by which the universe governs itself. In the transition, the word has taken on a new meaning.

From the layman’s point of view, what the scientist calls law is fact, rather than law—immutable fact. Or, if you prefer, it is law operating in a sphere where human beings can exercise no influence. We cannot alter the laws of the cosmos; we can only discover them. A law of science expresses mechanical regularity where no choice of action, no free will comes into play; it deals with constancy of behavior in nature. It has relevance for us because it makes the universe comprehensible and so enables us to utilize the forces of nature for human purposes.

We are bound by the laws that science has disclosed when we exploit these forces by means of technology. Likewise we are bound by the manmade laws of our society, for our actions affect fellow human beings. Technology straddles, as it were, the law of the universe and the law of man; it is subject to both.

Much confusion in popular thinking arises from this fact. The two laws are confounded. Or to put it differently, they are thought to be part of a single system of law so that one or the other must perforce take precedence.

Ever since scientists discovered that the earth is not the center of the universe, as had been maintained by the highest human authorities, we have been learning painfully that the laws of nature cannot be overturned by human fiat. It has taken a long time to attain this rational attitude; we are now conscious of the consequences of intolerance in the past. Perhaps this is why we are so tolerant toward those who claim the right to use technology as they see fit, and who treat every attempt by society to regulate such use in the public interest as if it were a modern repetition of the persecution of Galileo!

The right to be protected by law against injurious action by others is basic to civilized society. Yet, opponents of legislation intended to restrain use of potentially dangerous technologies are often able to prevent or delay enactment of such laws by playing upon the layman’s respect for science. It is their common practice to argue as if at issue were a law of science when, in fact, what is being considered is not science but the advisability or legality of the technological exploitation of a scientific discovery. The public would not be deceived by such arguments if it clearly understood the fundamental difference between science—which is knowledge—and technology—which is action based on knowledge.

To guard against being misled, one should cultivate an attitude of skepticism whenever the word science is used. Is it science that is being discussed or is it technology? If technology, the question at once arises whether the proposed action is legally permissible and socially desirable. These are matters that lie outside the domain of science. Just as the law of the cosmos cannot be overturned by human fiat, so is human law supreme within its own proper sphere of operation. Technology must therefore conform to that most basic of all human laws, the maxim of the “mutuality of liberty,” the principle that one man’s liberty of action ends where it would injure another. Without this maxim, freedom would be a barren privilege.

Whether or not a particular technology has harmful potentialities should not be decided unilaterally by those who use it. The user is an interested party to the conflict between private and public interest that every potentially harmful technology poses. Nearly always he is also a practical man.

I think one can fairly say that the practical man’s approach is shortrange and private, concerned with ways to put scientific discoveries to use in the most economic and efficient manner. Rarely will he give thought to the long-range and public consequences of his actions, that is, to the effects that a new technology may have on people, on the nation, on the world; on present and future generations.

To illustrate the disastrous consequences of a narrow practical approach, let be give some examples of technological damage to our natural environment.

Carelessly emitted, the waste products of new technologies create a massive problem of soil, water and air pollution. We may be permanently damaging the atmosphere by changing its chemical composition.

Nevertheless, we keep right on building things that belch great quantities of junk into the atmosphere, with little or no regard for the consequences. Even now, living in Los Angeles or New York City means breathing in the equivalent of five packs of cigarettes a day! At the present time truly clean air can only be found at the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.

We take pride that each American is the “owner” of hundreds of mechanical slaves who do the backbreaking and disagreeable work in our society. But we do not give thought to the fact that each of these mechanical slaves produces about the same amount of wastes as a human. This is a sobering thought and should cause us to question what our so-called “progress” is doing to our environment, and its significance to our posterity.

New products, profitable to manufacture and useful to consumers, are often themselves intractable pollutants. For instance, detergents which unlike soap do not dissolve in water, or pesticides and weed killers which, carelessly applied, will poison soil, crops, birds, animals, fish and eventually man.

Other technologies enable man to alter the very contours of the land— as with new strip mining machinery. Huge chunks of earth and rock with their topsoil and vegetation are gouged out, changing fertile country into a desolate lunarscape—a land robbed not only of its irreplaceable mineral wealth but of its fertility as well.

Man now has the means to slaughter all the wild animals on earth and he is well on his way of doing so. Consider what has been done to the vast riches of the seas.

With modern techniques, deep-sea fishing is so efficient that a few enterprises could rapidly sweep the oceans free of commercial fish. And this is what fishermen of all nationalities wish to do. As practical men they have no other interest than to use the latest technology that will increase their catch, preserve it and get it to market as speedily as possible.

We witness at the moment the end of one of the saddest cases of misuse of technology by greedy fishing interests. Unless these interests are curbed by truly effective international action, the great whales—the blue, the finback, the sperm—will soon disappear, victims of man’s “practical” folly.

These and other whales once populated the high seas in immense numbers. For hundreds of years whaling remained a reasonably fair contest between man and the intelligent, swift-moving mammals he hunted. Modern technology has turned it into a brutal genocide. Blindly pursuing what they doubtless consider an eminently practical objective—maximum profit today—the whalers are wiping out the very resources that could insure them a profit tomorrow.

This fall, Norway’s only whaling company announced that because the number of whales allotted to it was so few it would make the operation of its whaling fleet unprofitable; therefore they would not participate in whaling this year. Even in 1966, Japanese ships had to return home after only three of the normal five months at sea because they could find no whales.

Practical considerations aside, is anyone justified in using technology to exterminate a species that has existed on this earth for eons—the largest animal the world has ever seen? Are we certain our descendants may not at some future time have need of these mammals?

How we use technology profoundly affects the shape of our society. In the brief span of time—a century or so—that we have had a science-based technology, what use have we made of it? We have multiplied inordinately, wasted irreplaceable fuels and minerals and perpetrated incalculable and irreversible ecological damage. On the strength of our knowledge of nature, we have set ourselves above nature. We presume to change the natural environment for all the living creatures on this earth. Do we who are transients on this earth and not overly wise really believe we have the right to upset the order of nature, an order established by the power higher than man?

These are complicated matters for ordinary citizens to evaluate and decide. How in future to make wiser use of technology is perhaps the paramount public issue facing the electorates of industrial countries. It will tax their mental resources and challenge their political acumen. Certain measures suggest themselves.

Experience shows that by itself, the legal maxim of “the mutuality of liberty” will not prevent commitment to technologies that may later prove harmful. The maxim must be implemented by preventive public action— action of the kind that has long been operative in the field of public health. There is need for laws requiring that before a particular technology may be used, reliable tests must have been made to prove it will be useful and safe. A few such laws have been enacted; more are needed.

I suggest that, as a special public service, engineers take on the task of working for better protection against technological injury. This is a new and fruitful area in which they could make important contributions to human welfare—an area which requires no revolutionary change in the political or economic structure of society, merely greater precision and fuller implementation of the traditional principle that injuring the health or causing the death of human beings is unlawful. The term health should not be limited to physical health but should include psychic health and protection of the human personality as well. New technologies based on the uncertain “science” of the social sciences involve snooping into the inner recesses of the human mind, personality testing and pseudo-scientific manipulation of human beings. When they are imposed as conditions of employment or otherwise partake of an element of compulsion, these technologies should be regulated or outlawed entirely.

Much more thought should be given to technological interference with the balance of nature and its consequences for man, present and future. There is need of wider recognition that government has as much a duty to protect the land, the air, the water and the natural environment against technological damage, as it has to protect the country against foreign enemies and the individual against criminals. Conversely, that every citizen is duty bound to make an effort to understand how technology operates, what are its possibilities, its limitations, its potential dangers. The leisure modern technology makes available to ever larger numbers of citizens could not be better spent than in a determined effort to narrow the knowledge gap between those who understand science and technology and those who do not.

Since law and public opinion always lag behind the swift development of new technologies, there is need for more informed and responsible thinking among those who control technologies. This might be achieved by professionalizing the decision-making process in technology. Experience has shown that in the hands of professional persons technology is managed with greater concern for human welfare than when it is controlled, as at present, by nonprofessionals. The classic example is medicine.

Of all technologies, that of the physician has benefited human beings most and harmed them least. The stringent standards set by the profession and by society for the education and professional conduct of physicians accounts for this happy circumstance. Not only is no one permitted to practice who has not given proof of his competence, but physicians must also be broadly, liberally, humanistically educated men and women. This gives them perspective in evaluating their professional actions, an ability to see these actions against a humanistic background. Moreover, they operate under a code of ethics which requires them to place the needs of patients above all other considerations—a code incorporated twenty-five centuries ago in the Oath of Hippocrates, an oath still taken by young men and women embarking on a medical career.

To Greece we owe the noble idea that special knowledge and skill ought to be used to benefit man, rather than for personal aggrandizement or power, or as a means of extracting maximum gain from those in need of the services of men possessing special expertise. This concept of a trusteeship of knowledge could well be applied to all whose knowledge of science and technology surpasses that of the lay public, as it now is to physicians and surgeons. I have long advocated that engineering pattern itself after medicine and law, thus becoming a truly “learned” profession. It has, I believe, attained that status in some countries, though not in the United States.

As I see it, the most important aspect of the engineer’s code of professional ethics ought to be the obligation to do nothing that will unnecessarily aggravate future conditions of life. To my mind his greatest task is to do everything he can to preserve opportunity for a good life to coming generations who will not be as rich in land and resources as we are today.

This means, in particular: no needless waste of irreplaceable materials; no permanent destruction of good soil or of our shrinking water resources merely for the sake of immediate advantages; it means utmost ingenuity in substituting abundant materials for scarce materials, renewable resources for irreplaceable resources.

Above all, it means doing everything possible to preserve and protect our environment for our posterity.

These are my suggestions; others may have better ones to offer. What seems to me of utmost importance is that we never for a moment forget that a free society centers on man. It gives paramount considerations to human rights, interests, and needs. Society ceases to be free if a pattern of life develops where technology not man, becomes central to its purposes. We must not permit this to happen lest the human liberties for which mankind has fought, at so great a cost of effort and sacrifice, will be extinguished.





SEVENTEEN: ENVIRONMENTAL PERSPECTIVE[1]





This chapter was initially given as a speech in Washington, D.C., on August 1, 1979, at the Annual Convention of the International Platform Association, where Rickover received the Winston Churchill award. The International Platform Association recognizes people who have made significant intellectual contributions to American society. The subject of the speech was topical, given the Three Mile Island accident on March 28, 1979, and just as topical today after the earthquake and tidal wave at Fukushima, Japan, on March 11, 2011. The quantitative estimates that Rickover uses here to compare the relative risks of radiation to other environmental risks like smoking are based on a worst-case engineering approach to radiation protection (the linear no-threshold model) that some argue dramatically overpredicts the danger of low-level radiation.





I am greatly honored to be the recipient of the Winston Churchill Award. I had the privilege of meeting this great statesman when I visited the House of Commons in the early 1960’s. I admired him greatly for his achievements and because he was a singularly warmhearted human being.

I want to thank the members of the International Platform Association for this award and for inviting me to speak here this morning.

Long before the term environmentalist became a household word, I was concerned about our environment. Early in my career I became concerned that our natural resources were being consumed too rapidly; that the world’s finite supply of petroleum would eventually be depleted; that the hydrocarbons we were burning for energy would be desperately needed by future generations as raw materials. Back in 1936, I had computed that the oil used in all history was one cubic mile in volume. By 1979, the total oil consumption had reached 17 cubic miles (463 billion barrels), a cube about 2.6 miles on a side. These figures show how small this precious resource is.

For too many years every new highway or invention was welcomed as an indicator of progress without taking into account the long range consequences. Mankind has been profligate—as if we were owners rather than trustees of this planet.

Today, there is a greater awareness of these problems, but not the recognition of the limits that nature imposes. From many quarters there are pressures to come up with a “safe” source of abundant energy. But each alternative has its limitations. Some, such as nuclear power, are opposed by single interest groups that often vie to be the loudest to cry doom. As more aspects of everyday life are being characterized by one group or another, as involving high risk, ordinary citizens are finding it increasingly difficult— perhaps impossible—to get the issues into perspective.

Within some special interest groups are those who favor returning to the simpler style of 100 years ago. Their objective is clear; they tend to be against most forms of energy.

The great majority of people, however, want to sustain today’s advanced life style. For them the problem is one of evaluating alternatives— of comparing risks and weighing them against benefits.

The media, in search of exciting news, and special interest groups encourage embellishing and sensationalizing facts. Since tough facts are often bland and hard to market as “news,” the public gets a distorted picture of environmental matters. We face a danger that public policies in technology will be determined, in effect, by the media and by single interest groups.

While the problems we face today are immense, the increased public interest in energy and environmental matters offers an opportunity for progress toward solving these difficult, long range problems. But these will have to be dealt with intelligently, not on an emotional basis. Scientists, engineers, businessmen, medical people, lawyers, and others with professional knowledge and training are being called upon for facts and advice. It is essential that all involved take to heart their professional responsibilities; that they feel duty bound to convey what they know and what they do not know, with balance and perspective. That is not the case in many areas of society and is why, as President [Carter] recently said, America is suffering a crisis in confidence. The American people simply do not know what or whom to believe.

Our society now abounds with so-called experts who deal in half-truths and play on human fears or suspicions to further their own special interests. And a half-truth is like a half-brick—it will go farther. In so doing, they abrogate their professional responsibility to the public and cloud important issues. Those knowledgeable in the various disciplines have an obligation to see that these issues are kept in perspective, so they can be addressed intelligently by our leaders and understood by ordinary citizens. Consistency is needed in evaluating risks, and in providing proper perspective.





ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS

Nothing we do is without risk. Risk is an inherent and accepted part of daily life. The problem lies in determining how great are the risks and what should we truly be afraid of. For this, it is important to acquire a sense of perspective. Should the falling of Skylab have been a major concern? It was estimated that there was only a one chance in 150 that Skylab debris would hit one person in the entire world. Nevertheless, in some areas emergency preparedness centers were activated and airplanes grounded. A more meaningful risk to me was that I had a one chance in six hundred billion of being hit. This risk is worth worrying about for about one billionth of my time, which translates to about one second.

The risk from Skylab was inconsequential. The environmental risk having the greatest effect in the United States today is smoking. Smoking causes us about 326,000 deaths each year, half of these are from heart disease, and about one-quarter from lung cancer. Sixty years ago we had little lung cancer. Today more are dying from it than from automobile accidents.

Each cigarette has been estimated to shorten life expectancy by five minutes. Another method of estimating risk shows that of a group of 10,000 who continue smoking, 1600 die from the effects.

Another major health problem in the United States is caused by overweight. Our affluence and use of television contribute to this. Each ounce above normal weight is estimated to reduce life expectancy by two days.

We accept the inevitability of automobile accidents. Chances are that ten people in this room will be seriously injured this year from automobiles. By building safer cars or further reducing speed the risk could be reduced. But even a parked car is not risk free. You could choose not to drive, yet pedestrians and bicyclists also are injured by cars. Reducing risk of injury from automobiles to zero requires moving to a place where there are none.

These comparisons should give some idea of the risk involved in things you are familiar with. They give a basis for judging what smoking, or eating, or watching Skylab fall could mean to your health and safety. This is the kind of perspective to which people can relate. Everyone knows life is risky. If he has the basis for judgment, he can decide what to do or not do.





RADIATION RISK

While accepting the many daily risks of living, many seem to be getting the idea that their demands for energy should be met on essentially a risk-free basis. Since this is impossible, attention should be focused on taking reasonable steps to safeguard the public, on developing realistic assessment of the risks, and on placing them in perspective. One of the most widely distorted risks is radiation.

At the start of the Navy’s Nuclear Propulsion Program in 1946, I realized the need for careful attention to radiation. It was clear to me that if nuclear ships were to be viable, there would have to be assurance that workers and crews not be subjected to excessive radiation. To emphasize this, I designed the shielding for our Naval nuclear plants to be many times more stringent than required by the standards then in effect. As a result, the shielding built into the first nuclear submarine, the Nautilus, was so conservative that it continues to be far more than adequate to meet the considerably lower radiation levels permitted today.

My approach to radiation shielding design was not agreed to in some places. For example, in 1957, the Chief of the Bureau of Ships—my boss—asked me to reduce the shielding in our submarines in order to save weight. Likewise, in 1965, a Congressional Committee launched an investigation to determine whether my conservative approach to shielding was unnecessarily increasing the cost of submarines. In both cases I held to my determination to keep radiation levels as low as I could reasonably get.

Insofar as the environment is concerned Naval plants have been so designed and operated that in each of the last eight years the total gamma radioactivity discharged to all harbors of the world has been less than two thousandths of a curie. This quantity is for the operation of over 100 ships and all their support facilities. To give you an idea what this means, if one person were able to drink the entire amount of this radioactivity discharged into any harbor in all of 1978, he would not exceed the annual radiation exposure permitted by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for an individual worker.

The word “radiation” has come to connote danger. It is often described as so dangerous that any amount is unsafe—as if the only question worth addressing is “how fast will radiation harm you?” Because you cannot see, feel, taste, hear, or smell radiation, it has an aura of mystery. But this same mystery appears to be absent from other potentially hazardous things for which we have a lack of sensory perception, such as radio waves, carbon monoxide, and small concentrations of numerous cancer causing substances. These do not generate the same sense of fear as radiation.

The fear instilled by radioactivity today is akin to the fear of electricity following the invention of the electric light bulb one hundred years ago by Thomas Edison. Public fear of electricity was inflamed. Wall plaques had to be installed in rooms with electric lights, assuring people that “the use of electricity for lighting is in no way harmful to health, nor does it affect the soundness of sleep.” Yet electricity has helped to transform man’s life from a short one of drudgery to one where long life and higher aspirations can be realized.

Scientists have stated for decades that radiation can cause harm. However, all of us have been subjected to radiation throughout our lives from time of conception and, in fact, even prior to conception. The entire human race has been subjected to radiation, as has every living thing, throughout the entire evolution of our earth. The average person in the United States received each year about one-tenth REM from natural radioactivity in the earth, in his body, and from cosmic radiation.

The unit of radiation, REM, ought to be required knowledge in all technical societies. It is defined in terms of energy absorbed in body tissues. Receiving one REM of gamma radiation is equivalent to absorbing 100 ergs of radiation energy for each gram of body tissue. There are 454 grams in a pound. An erg is the amount of energy required to lift a mosquito weighing one thousandth of a gram about one centimeter. In terms of energy the REM is a small unit. A dose of one REM raises body temperature only two millionths of a degree centigrade.

We are not accustomed to fear background radiation; after all it is part of our natural environment. Yet in scientific terms it can be shown that its risk is not zero. More is known about radiation than almost any substance that can affect humans. More money has been spent to learn the effects of radiation on humans than for any other hazard in our modern society. The main effect is cancer. Effects other than cancer have not been found for lowlevel radiation exposure to adults. While genetic effects from radiation can occur, they are so small that none have been found in 35,000 children conceived after the nuclear explosions, by parents irradiated in Hiroshima or Nagasaki in 1945.

The combination of one-tenth REM per year background radiation, together with nearly the same average amount from medical diagnostic radiation, is estimated to cause almost one percent of cancer deaths in the United States. In an average group of 10,000 people, 1600 will die of cancer. Sixteen of these deaths will be from background and medical radiation. If the lifetime radiation exposure of 10,000 people is increased by an average of one REM per person—a total of 10,000 REM—it is estimated that one additional fatal cancer may occur.[2]

This estimate of risk gives perspective on what radiation exposure means in the following ways:

Of all industrial and medical radiation workers in the United States, about 15,000 die each year from cancer. The total radiation exposure from their work adds an estimated 25 cancer deaths per year.

Radiation from the nuclear accident at Three Mile Island may add one fatal cancer death to the public within fifty miles. Of the two million people living within this fifty mile radius, 325,000 are expected to die of cancer from causes other than radioactivity released from this accident.



The perspective on radiation can be improved by comparison. For example, I know an apparently healthy person who forty years ago received more radiation from medical chest X-rays than the total exposure all 15,000 radiation workers at nine shipyards received in 1978 from Naval nuclear power plant work. Others have had similar exposures, and years later are alive and well.

Another example: for years rumors have persisted that radiation induced cancer has killed the crew of the first nuclear-powered ship, the Nautilus. In 1978 the Navy traced each of the 96 officers and enlisted men of this first crew. Despite the rumors, all the men associated with operating the nuclear propulsion plant were alive and well.

With this perspective you are in a position to better answer the question, “Is radiation safe?” If safe means zero effect, then you have to conclude radiation is unsafe. But to be consistent, you should also conclude that background radiation and medical radiation are unsafe. Or more simply, that being alive is unsafe.

“Safe” is a relative term. Comparisons are necessary for actual meaning. For a worker, safe means the risk is small compared to other risks accepted in normal work activities. Aside from work, safe means the risk is small compared to other risks accepted in life. From what I have said, it should be clear that the radiation encountered in our daily activities should not be the scary subject it is proclaimed to be.





EXTRAPOLATIONS

In radiation, as in other areas, a most effective way to frighten people is to proclaim that no one knows what the effects are. This has been repeated so often that it has become an article of faith that no one knows the effects of low-level radiation on humans.

One could well state, “No one knows the risks of smoking a few cigarettes,” but the risks of smoking a large number of cigarettes are well known. If 10,000 people smoke an average of four cigarettes a day, about 100 deaths will result; data are not available for lower smoking rates. For radiation, doses of 100 REM to each of 10,000 people would be required to cause an equal number of deaths. The effects of radiation on humans at doses of 100 REM are well known. The major controversy over radiation risks today is how to extend the risk estimates to even lower levels. As we get to lower levels, it becomes more and more difficult to detect the effects, and this becomes a problem. Would it be possible to determine the effect on the death rate of doing one situp or pushup a day?

Using the figures I just presented you can extend the numbers to show that one REM has about the same risk of death as smoking one cigarette per month. I make this comparison only to show that finding the effect on the death rate of one REM of exposure is about the same as trying to find out the effect of smoking one cigarette a month.

The point is that the effect of one REM is extremely small. There are physical limits to how far we can go to ascertain precisely the size of this risk, but we do know it is small. Those who sing the refrain of how little we know about the low-level radiation do a disservice. Instead, they should explain how much we do know about the small actual effects.





STUDIES

Today, the universal answer to a claimed lack of knowledge of environmental effects is to conduct a study—nearly always at Government expense. I am not against studying environmental or health effects per se. But studies must be high quality; they have to cover tens or hundreds of thousands of people, and they must extend for many years, to have any chance of validly detecting effects as small as those from low-level radiation. One wonders whether this is a proper expenditure of taxpayer money. Are there not other areas more deserving of this kind of attention?

The compulsion to study is often used to quell public fears. It is also a way to show that something is being done. At Three Mile Island, epidemiological studies are being launched. One study has been commissioned to investigate the radiation effects on all pregnant women in the area—there were only a few hundred. These pregnant women received less extra exposure to radiation as a result of the Three Mile Island accident than they would have received had they moved to Denver, Colorado, for a few months. If we must have a new study, it would make more sense to study radiation effects in Denver, with its higher background radiation due to the high altitude. Or members and staffs of the U.S. Congress could be studied because there are places on Capitol Hill with radiation levels above normal background due to natural elements in the building stone. If the idea of conducting studies on Congressional groups strikes you as strange, you may understand why I have reservations about the real need for some of the studies underway.

A study is often the way to forestall taking meaningful action or making a decision. Doing a study is usually doing nothing. deMontaigne said, “Too much study suffocates the active part of understanding.” Studies are frequently used to quiet an outcry. The study takes time. During this period the clamor dies down. The study is issued, filed and forgotten. Meanwhile a new issue has aroused the public. Another study is authorized. The report is filed in the archives, and so on, and so on.





INJURY CLAIMS

Another aspect of radiation where scare stories are contributing to the problem is in the realm of radiation injury claims. Here, as in other areas, our approach to life is to turn from self-sufficiency to excessive reliance on Government. Many have come to presume that any risk, no matter how small, warrants indemnification by the Government. I am not against the payment of legitimate claims where the cause can be substantiated and it can be clearly shown that the Government was at fault. But when the risks are minimal, common sense should prevail.

In 1978, a worker in New Mexico was awarded $75,000 in worker’s compensation because he feared radiation. No physical injury was claimed. No excessive exposure to radiation was claimed. In 1979, the Connecticut State Supreme Court awarded compensation to a municipal employee for injuring his ankle playing ping pong before his work shift started. A compensation claim was approved for a Navy worker for headaches allegedly caused by sitting at a desk with his head down. Such abuses are becoming common. The implications of these awards are far-reaching—not simply for the money involved but in the attitudes being inculcated into large numbers of Americans.

There are about 65,000 employees in Government-owned Naval shipyards. About 22,000 past and present employees have filed claims for damage to their ears from noise. These Government workers are being paid an average of $12,000 per claim. No distinction is made for normal loss of hearing with age. No effort is made to differentiate hearing damage caused on the job from that caused by modern music played at deafening volume.

Secretaries whose only exposure to noise was a typewriter or copy machine are receiving awards. Workers apparently feel it is their right to receive these awards for normal work. In the last ten years, over $75,000,000 has been awarded to Naval shipyard employees for alleged hearing loss. The General Accounting Office has studied this area and found it riddled with fraud and abuse.

Since risk from radiation cannot be proven to be zero, suggestions have been made that the Government should pay all the shipyard workers who get cancer just to be sure that none which might be related to radiation are missed. At a typical shipyard, about 10,000 workers have received radiation exposure from Naval Nuclear Propulsion work since the beginning of the program. Their radiation exposure from such work may add one or two cancer deaths to the 1600 normally expected in a group this size. To pay compensation to 1600 individuals so that one or two possibly deserving ones are not denied is absurd and unaffordable.

Demands have been made that all veterans who develop cancer be compensated because the cancer might have been caused by radiation from nuclear weapons tests. This would result in the Government making payment to almost 100,000 men who, according to normal incidence, will die of cancer, so that an estimated twelve possibly valid claims are not missed. Many claims have already been filed by these veterans.

The Navy’s experience with hearing loss claims demonstrates that as long as there is money in the U.S. Treasury and Government agencies are willing to hand it out, there will be plenty of claimants. Many are urged on by unscrupulous lawyers who promote frivolous claims for a fee or a percentage of the award. Ordinary citizens, if they knew what was going on in some of these programs, would demand a halt to such generosity with their taxes.

To those who get paid, this kind of cancer payment program may seem like getting something for nothing—like chain letters, the Pyramid Club, or the Circle of Gold confidence games. But the taxpayer foots the bill. In my view, environmental issues are badly out of perspective when we end up with a system that pays tax money to all who get cancer, merely to take care of a few for whom the real cause was radiation.





NEWS MEDIA

The news media have contributed substantially to getting environmental issues out of perspective. In their efforts to generate interesting stories that help sell newspapers, many members of the press have distorted the facts and the issues. In complex areas like energy and environment, bare facts are unexciting. To spice up otherwise dull articles, there is at times a tendency to be selective in the facts used or in the topics covered. At times conclusions are shown as facts. I understand that in some publications, the advertising department has a say in what gets printed as news.

Too often, facts have lost their proper separation from opinions. Merely by choosing what stories are reported, the media express opinions. Publishing a statement without reservations lends authority to that statement. Serious articles are often written by those who lack the technical background to understand even the available facts. And sometimes news is contrived. Let me give you examples:

During the Three Mile Island emergency, residents and local officials commented how useful the local news reports were, but that the national news reports were distorted. For example, one national television crew requested that an entire street be cleared so that their film could show, by the empty street, how frightened people were.

A so-called documentary television report on radiation was strongly anti-nuclear. It led to the conclusion in which the reporter was said to have been killed by radiation. However, nowhere in the report of his death from lung cancer was it mentioned that he was a longterm heavy smoker.



In areas such as nuclear power, even innocuous events are frequently blown into issues by a zealous reporter or editor. Not long ago, a hose broke, spilling a few gallons of pure water into one of our most polluted rivers. Because this happened on a nuclear-powered submarine, the story appeared the next morning in the newspaper.

The failures of the media—its preoccupation with the sensational and its lack of balance and perspective—are understandable to some extent. News is like fish—it must be sold quickly. But these stories can have a harmful effect on the public. Doctors report that following a series of news stories which fan the fear of radiation, the risk of death increases for people who will not take X-rays they should take.

Our country’s growth has been fueled by technology. The bulk of the information on this subject is in the news media. It, therefore, has a special obligation to educate, through responsible reporting. Given the facts in proper perspective, the public can understand environmental issues. The tendency of the press to omit facts interferes with understanding these issues. For proper perspective, the news media must exercise self restraint, and make available enough information so the public can understand the significance of the events reported.

I have no simple solution for this problem. The media are not really accountable to anyone. Freedom of the press belongs to the person who owns the press. The only way I can see a change is for the public to demand more enlightened and factual reporting: perhaps the media will respond. Loss of sales or viewer interest is something a newspaper or TV network understands immediately.





GOVERNMENT

In environmental matters, there is a tendency to view Government officials as if working for the Government were itself evidence of incompetence and bad intentions, therefore guilty of the charges leveled them.

Some self-proclaimed public interest groups tend to focus on a single issue, demanding an immediate solution regardless of cost. But when Government agencies are pressured into solving one problem in a narrow fashion, this often leads to exacerbation of other problems. In some cases companies have been forced to switch from coal to gas for environmental reasons only to have to switch back a few years later because of energy considerations.

The Government agencies involved in these issues have an almost impossible job. Faced with problems that would challenge the wisdom of Solomon, Government agencies are increasingly plagued with other demands on their limited resources. The flood of injury claims is but a small part of the problem. Today we in Government can be tied in knots by frivolous law suits, Freedom of Information Act requests, investigations, and studies. These demands, individually, seem reasonable and necessary safeguards over the activities of Government officials. But faced with limited resources, the cumulative effect of these demands diverts attention and effort from their primary functions. It is analogous to the case of Cyrano de Bergerac who had to compose a sonnet while fighting a duel.

To be sure, we do have problems in Government. Some Government agencies themselves have become a sort of special-interest group. In this way the Government itself has been unable to provide the perspective to balance the problems inherent in new technologies. Those who criticize Government’s inability to respond effectively to the challenges it confronts should work equally hard to promote within the Government an atmosphere in which it is possible for us to devote our attention to important issues.





“EXPERTS” IN SCARE STORIES

Many have come to realize they can make names for themselves by scaring the public on radiation and other environmental risks. This approach creates reputations because the news media play them up. It creates research grants—with the Government, of course, paying—to explore the newly discovered problems. Time and again a so-called “expert” makes a startling “discovery” followed by a not-so-startling conclusion that he is the one who should conduct further research at Government expense.

To illustrate the trouble one self-proclaimed expert can cause, I will recount a situation I have followed closely. Two years ago a young medical doctor with little if any experience in radiation or epidemiology research started investigating the effects of radiation on workers at the Portsmouth, New Hampshire, Naval Shipyard. Studies in this field are complex, and require considerable talent and effort to find answers and avoid mistakes. In conducting the study he enlisted the help of an investigative reporting team from the Boston Globe.

In February 1978 the front page of this paper carried results of the investigation. This was not the case of a newspaper reporting something out of a technical journal; it was a report by the paper itself. No technical reviews were printed with the story. Reservations were stated in the story, but in a manner that made the reservations appear doubtful and readily dismissed. In the name of investigative reporting the newspaper itself had become an advocate for a highly questionable study, thereby dropping any vestige of objectivity. This was a classic case of limited information being blown into sensational news.

The story was printed in many newspapers here and abroad. The summary featured in many papers was that cancer deaths were six times higher for radiation workers at Portsmouth than for other workers. The news accounts spread fear among the workers, their families, and neighbors. Others here and abroad wondered if being near a nuclear powered ship was dangerous.

The articles and concerns of constituents generated immediate Congressional interest. Within a week, a Congressional hearing took place. But little was done at the hearing to explore the validity of the study’s conclusions.

White House officials used the results of the private study to order a Government-wide investigation of radiation. Millions of dollars will be spent carrying out these investigations.

For the past year and one-half I and key people in my organization and at the shipyards have been tied up with this issue. It has consumed our time and interfered with our proper work. Ironically, it has diverted attention from an important technical aspect of our job, which is to ensure safety of workers.

Throughout the controversy, the news media headline writers found it difficult to resist inserting the word “deadly” in front of “radiation.” They rarely reported the Navy’s achievements in radiation control, and the careful attention paid in this area. Those promoting the stories did not bother to explain that, despite a doubling in the number of nuclear-powered ships, radiation exposure had been reduced to one quarter what it had been fifteen years previously; that no one involved in the program had exceeded the Federal radiation exposure limits in a dozen years; that no one in the program had received more than one-tenth the radiation exposure allowed for radioactivity inside the body.

Official risk estimates indicate that about 1600 cancer deaths are expected for every 10,000 people. Among the 10,000 radiation workers who have worked at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, exposure received on the job might add two cancer deaths. Many scientists believe the true effects of radiation will be much smaller.[3] These facts are in sharp contrast to the exaggerated statements made in the Boston Globe.

Eventually the facts began to come out. In a Congressional hearing one and a half years after his report was published, the investigating doctor entirely changed his results. He repudiated his earlier conclusion that the cancer death rate for radiation workers at Portsmouth was double the death rate of their co-workers. He testified he could no longer support his earlier conclusion that the leukemia rate was six times higher for Portsmouth radiation workers than for non-radiation workers.

I do not intend to denigrate those who are addressing valid public health issues in a responsible fashion. But a true professional does not publish until he knows the facts and acknowledges the significance of potential errors. Those who do not follow this path of credible scientific inquiry are acting irresponsibly. Not everyone who proclaims himself an expert, is an expert. Not everyone who claims to be acting in the public interest, is actually doing so. We must guard against those who in the name of public interest pursue fame through exaggeration. It is easy to use statistics improperly to predict large problems or to emphasize risk, out of context. Those who do so cause great harm by preventing a balanced assessment of the risks, thereby distorting proper preventive and remedial actions.

Since the doctor’s new testimony, the Boston Globe has been comparatively silent. To my knowledge, the publishers have made no move to return the award they received for their earlier investigative reporting. There has been no apology to the workers and families they scared. The publishers have sold newspapers and have now moved on to other issues. I doubt if this experience will have any impact on their future reporting.

When a newspaper teams up with a doctor and then rushes preliminary, unsubstantiated results into print, it develops a vested interest to show that its reports are correct. Thus, it discounts or does not report information which conflicts with its own stand. That is the apogee of irresponsibility.

Such irresponsibility is a failure of newspaper management—not of the reporter. Much of the blame for other problems in the media also lie with management, who set the standards, style, and tone, and create the pressure for instant sensational reporting.





NUCLEAR POWER

I have spent considerable time discussing how public understanding of the true risks of radiation has been distorted in the name of protecting the environment. I have concentrated on radiation, although the problems I have mentioned are common to other environmental issues as well. The public perception of radiation has a direct bearing on the use of nuclear power in this country.

Nuclear power is not easy to deal with in this country because it has become a highly polarized issue. It involves individuals’ concerns for themselves and their families, and it is a highly technical, sophisticated technology. Ultimately, the decision whether we should have nuclear power is a political one—in the true sense of the word—that is, one made by the people through their elected representatives. It is essential that the decision be made on the basis of fact, not rhetoric, nor conjecture, or hope; nor as a result of the widespread tendency to sensationalize or ignore the true limits and risks of the alternatives.

According to the estimates I have already stated, the actual radiation exposure to workers and to the public from today’s use of nuclear power can be estimated to result in about eleven extra cancer deaths per year out of a total of 360,000. On this basis, to eliminate nuclear power here would then potentially save an estimated eleven lives per year, but reduce the energy available. This loss of energy itself, might well result in loss of life.

If the saving of eleven human lives were the sole objective, better results could be obtained from the following, than by eliminating nuclear power:

Reduce cigarette consumption for each smoker by one cigarette per year

Reduce medical radiation exposure by one percent

Move the population of the Denver region to coastal areas which have lower background radiation levels

Eliminate stock car racing

Reduce the overweight condition of those in this room by an average of three pounds.



Some analysts have reported there may be greater radiation exposure from operation of a coal-fired central power station than from a nuclear power station. Whether this assertion on radiation is or is not true, accidents in mining and transporting coal, and the effects on the public from sulphur and other pollutants, result in a demonstrably higher death rate from use of coal than from nuclear power.

Concern over a nuclear accident is often cited as a reason for prohibiting nuclear power. Obviously, a repeat of the Three Mile Island accident cannot be lightly accepted and corrective actions are called for to prevent recurrence. I have provided my views to Congress and to others responsible for assessing what might be done in the commercial nuclear power program. The record and risks of this source of energy should be put into perspective, as compared with other risks we face.

Here are some examples of accidents far worse than anything resulting from Three Mile Island, yet without comparable repercussions on public policy:

In 1947, a ship loading ammonium nitrate fertilizer exploded, killing 561 people and leveling much of Texas City, Texas.

Many fires, explosions and wrecks have occurred in which more people than this were killed.

Forty-eight earthquakes, floods, tidal waves, and storms have been recorded in each of which 10,000 or more people were killed.

The DC-10 airplane, which recently crashed, killed several hundred people. No one is considering abolishing aviation—it is too important to our way of life.

I am not aware of anyone advocating relocating cities such as Los Angeles or San Francisco away from geological faults which might cause earthquakes or away from risk of flood or storm damage.

As another example, there are approximately one hundred million shipments of hazardous materials annually in this country. Hundreds of people each year are killed or seriously injured by hazardous materials in accidents. More scrutiny is being given to the approximately two million radioactive shipments than to the others, yet not a single death or injury has occurred from radiation or radioactivity in the material being transported.

I am not an expert or particularly knowledgeable in the areas of environmental effects of other forms of power generation. However, I am aware that many knowledgeable people conclude that the total risk involved in the use of nuclear power is no greater than that of any alternate source which can meet our needs in the next few decades.

Today many are optimistic about the possibility of widespread use of solar and other so-called “natural resources of energy.” However, in their enthusiasm they often disregard the limitations and environmental effects of these sources. Others advocate exploitation of shale oil deposits without mentioning the vast amounts of water and earth removal required.

Any large-scale generation of energy—whether nuclear or from other sources—involves major engineering difficulties and potential environmental impacts. It is incorrect to assume that technology and increased Government spending can overcome limits nature imposes.

I remember the optimistic projections made for nuclear power when it was first being developed. It was predicted that electricity from nuclear power would be too cheap to meter. These predictions sprang from hope, from ignorance of the engineering problems that would be encountered in using nuclear power.

In similar vein, many advocates exaggerate the benefits and ignore the problems of the energy sources they are promoting. The solution to our energy needs is not just over the hill at the end of the rainbow. Nature always demands its price; providing adequate amounts of energy will exact its proper price.





CONCLUSION

The technical problems involved in developing additional sources of energy are great, and will require our best talent.

I am not a proponent of nuclear power or of any other energy source. All alternatives have their own limitations; none are without risk.

In addition to the technical problems of generating energy, environmental concerns must be factored into the equation. Whether these can be solved on a scale enabling us to sustain our present standard of living is not clear at this time.

One thing is clear. These problems cannot be dealt with effectively— from a technical or political standpoint—if those responsible are not set free to work on the problems. We cannot make progress unless those truly interested in solving these problems act responsibly.

Too many so-called technical, medical, and scientific people have been abrogating their professional responsibility to present facts accurately and objectively and in a context which enables others to evaluate them.

Too many in the media are sensationalizing the news in an attempt to attract readers, generate controversy, and make a name for themselves.

Too many self-proclaimed public interest advocates are pushing single interest ideas in ways that make it increasingly difficult to place the issues in true perspective.

Too many, in exercising their so-called rights, are exploiting environmental issues to obtain grants from the Government; through study contracts, improper injury claims and other methods.

These conflicting pressures have left the public uncertain, distrustful, confused, and in need of help. I consider this audience can provide a signal service by answering this call for help. Environmental issues must be put into proper perspective. Balancing risks and benefits must become a standard approach to evaluating environmental matters. The significance of environmental data must be explained to the public, so it can reach its own conclusions.

The present crisis in confidence over energy requires this approach to environmental issues. The Chinese word for crisis combines two ideographs, wei chi (pronounced weigh gee), literally, dangerous opportunity. A time of crisis is also a time of opportunity. We should take advantage of this opportunity to achieve a proper perspective in environmental matters.





PART V: EPILOGUE





Near the end of his career, Admiral Rickover became introspective of his life. The following chapter is a speech that he gave on a number of occasions that considers the root cause of a good life—a life of purpose. He first gave this speech in 1977 at a meeting of the San Diego Rotary Club. The last occasion was in 1982 as the Morgenthau Memorial Lecture at Columbia University. Rickover presented the following version at the Commencement of Hampden-Sydney College in May 1979.

Not surprisingly, Rickover thought accepting responsibility was necessary for a life of purpose. This final chapter provides insight into what motivated his incredible life.





EIGHTEEN: THOUGHTS ON MAN’S PURPOSE IN LIFE[1]





Voltaire once said “Not to be occupied and not to exist are one and the same thing for a man.” With those few words he captured the essence of a purpose in life: to work, to create, to excel, and to be concerned about the world and its affairs.

The question of what we can do to give purpose and meaning to our lives has been debated for thousands of years by philosophers and common men. Yet today we seem further from the answer than before. Despite our great material wealth and high standard of living, people are groping for something that money cannot buy. As Walter Lippman said: “Our life, though it is full of things, is empty of the kind of purpose and effort that gives to life its flavor and meaning.”

I do not claim to have a magic answer, but I believe there are some basic principles of existence, propounded by thinkers through the ages, which can guide us toward the goal of finding a purpose in life.

Among these principles of existence, responsibility is the one that forces man to become involved. Acceptance of responsibility means that the individual takes upon himself an obligation. Responsibility is broad and continuous. None of us is ever free of it, even if our work is unsuccessful.

Responsibility implies a commitment to self that many are unwilling to make; they are strongly attracted to accepting a course of action or direction for their lives imposed by an external source. Such a relationship absolves the individual from the personal decision-making process. He wraps himself in the security blanket of inevitability or dogma and need not invest the enormous amounts of time, effort and, above all, the thought required to make creative decisions and meaningfully participate in the governance of his life.

The sense of responsibility for doing a job right seems to be declining. In fact, the phrase “I am not responsible” has become a standard response in our society to the complaints that a job has been poorly done. This response is a semantic error. Generally, what a person means is: “I cannot be held legally liable.” Yet, from a moral or ethical point of view, the person who disclaims responsibility is correct: by taking this way out, he is not responsible—he is irresponsible.

The unwillingness to act and to accept responsibility is a symptom of America’s growing self-satisfaction with the status quo. The result is a paralysis of the spirit, entirely uncharacteristic of Americans during the previous stages of our history.

The task of finding a purpose in life calls for perseverance. I have seen many young men rush out into the world with their messages and when they find out how deaf the world is, withdraw, to wait and save their strength. They believe that after a while they will be able to get up on some little peak from which they can make themselves heard. Each thinks that in a few years he will have gained a standing, and then he can use his power for good. Finally the time comes, and with it a strange discovery: he has lost his horizon of thought. Without perseverance, ambition and a sense of responsibility evaporate.

Another important principle which gives purpose and meaning to life is excellence. Because the conviction to strive for excellence is an intensely personal one, the attainment of excellence is personally satisfying. Happiness comes from the full use of one’s power to achieve excellence. Life is potentially an empty hole, and there are few more satisfying ways of filling it than by achieving and exercising excellence.

This principle is one which Americans seem to be losing, and at a time when the Nation stands in need of it. A lack of excellence implies mediocrity. And in a society that is willing to accept mediocrity, the opportunities for failure are boundless. Mediocrity can destroy us just as surely as any of the more often named perils.

It is important that we distinguish between what it means to fail at a task and what it means to be mediocre. There is all the difference in the world between a life lived with dignity and style, yet which ends in failure, and one that achieves power and glory, yet is dull, unoriginal, unreflective, and mediocre. In a real sense, what matters is not so much whether we make lots of money or hold a prestigious job; what matters is that we seek out others with knowledge and enthusiasm—that we become people who can enjoy our own company.

In the end, avoiding mediocrity gives us the chance to discover that success comes in making ourselves into educated individuals, able to recognize that there is a difference between living with excellence and living with mediocrity.

Creativity is another of the basic principles of existence that helps to give purpose in life. The deepest joy in life is to be creative. To find an undeveloped situation, to see its possibilities, to decide upon a course of action, and then to devote the whole of one’s resources to carrying it out, even if it means battling against the stream of contemporary opinion, is a satisfaction in comparison with which superficial pleasures are trivial.

To create you must care. You must have the courage to speak out. The world’s advances always have depended on the courage of its leaders. A measure of courage in the private citizen is also necessary to the good conduct of the state. Otherwise men who have power through riches, intrigue, or office can administer the state at will, and ultimately, to their private advantage.

To have courage means to pursue your goals, or to satisfy your responsibilities, even though others may stand in the way and success seems like a dream. It takes courage to stand and fight for what you believe is right. And the fight never ends. You have to start it over again each morning as the sun rises. Sir Thomas More wrote: “If evil persons cannot be rooted out, and if you cannot correct habitual attitudes, you must not therefore abandon the commonwealth. You must strive to guide policy indirectly, so that you make the best things, and what you cannot turn to good, you can at least make less bad.”

These principles of existence—responsibility, perseverance, excellence, creativity, courage—must be wedded to intellectual growth and development if we are to find meaning and purpose in our lives. It is a device of the devil to let sloth into the world. By the age of twenty, some of us already have adopted a granite-like attitude, which we maintain throughout life. Intellectually, we must never stop growing. Our conscience should never release us from concern for the problems of the day. Our minds must be forever skeptical, yet questioning. We must strive to be singularly free from that failing so common to man, deplored by Pascal in the “Pensees,” of filling our leisure with meaningless distractions so as to preclude the necessity of thought. To be an intellectual in the fullest sense, one’s mind must be in constant movement.

Aristotle believed that happiness was to be found in the use of the intellect. In other words, ignorance is not bliss; it is oblivion. The inspired prayer does not petition for health, wealth, prosperity, or anything material but asks, “God, illumine my intellect.” Man cannot find purpose in his life without expanding and using his intellectual qualities and capacities. Liberal learning is a primary source of these qualities. By liberal learning I refer to discerning taste, wise judgment, informed and critical perspectives that transcend specialized interests and partisan passions; the capacity to understand complexity and to grow in response to it.

A cause of many of our mistakes and problems is ignorance—an overwhelming national ignorance of the facts about the rest of the world. A nation, or an individual, cannot function unless the truth is available and understood; no amount of good by our leaders or the media will offset ignorance and apathy in the common citizen. Since the United States is a democracy, the broad answer is that all of us must become better informed. Reading is one method of accomplishing this purpose. By spending a few dollars for a book, the thoughts and life’s work of a great man are available to us.

As a reader, man is unique among the living things. The ability to read— and, more broadly, the ability to express complete ideas through language— distinguishes human beings from all other life forms. Without language, complex thought is inconceivable and the mind remains undeveloped. The inability to speak and write imprisons thought. In the same vein, sloppy, imprecise thinking begets sloppy, imprecise language. Language and thought are interconnected, and the written word is the vehicle which best advances both.

Therefore, I count reading and its associated skill writing among the most significant of all human efforts. Good writing, after all, is simply the result of enormous reading, detailed research, and careful thought. It means studying to gain a good vocabulary and practicing to learn how to use it. It seems to me that these kindred skills should be developed and nourished from the very first, if man is to grow intellectually. And unless he can express himself well, he can exert little influence on his fellowmen.

I will now discuss one final principle of existence essential to man’s purpose in life: the development of standards of ethical and moral conduct. God, it is generally conceded, has made a remarkable job of the physical universe but has, strangely, not done quite so well with the spiritual element. There is abundant evidence around us to conclude that morals and ethics are becoming less prevalent in people’s lives. The standards of conduct which lay deeply buried in accepted thought for centuries no longer are considered absolute. Many people seem unable to differentiate between physical relief and moral satisfaction; they confuse material success in life with virtue.

We are now living on the accumulated moral capital of traditional religion. It is running out, and we have no other consensus of values to take its place. This is partly so because man can now obtain on earth what previously was promised him when he reached heaven.

In our system of society, no authority exists to tell us what is good and desirable. We are each free to seek what we think is good in our own way. The danger is that where men will compromise truth and let decency slip, they eventually end up with neither. A free society can survive only through men and women of integrity. Fortunately, there still exist human beings who remain concerned about moral and ethical values and about obtaining justice for others. These are the individuals who provide the hope of the ultimate realism that is marked by a society’s capacity to survive rather than to be eventually destroyed.

It is important also to recognize that morals and ethics are not relative; they do not depend on the situation. This may be the hardest principle to follow in working to achieve goals. The ends, no matter how worthy they appear, cannot justify just any means. Louis Brandeis, who was deeply convinced of the importance of standards, said: “One can never be sure of ends—political, social, economic. There must always be doubt and difference of opinion.” But Brandeis had no doubt about means. “Fundamentals do not change; centuries of thought have established standards. Lying and sneaking are always bad, no matter what the ends.”

This is an ennobling statement. Life is not meaningless for the man who considers certain actions to be wrong simply because they are wrong, whether or not they violate a law. This kind of moral code gives a person a focus, a basis for his conduct. Certainly there is a temptation to let go of morals in order to do the expedient thing. But there is also a tremendous power in standing by what is right. Principle and accomplishment need not be incompatible.

A common thread moves through all the principles I have discussed: it is the desire to improve oneself and one’s surroundings by actively participating in life. Too many succumb to an emotional preference for the comfortable solution instead of the difficult one. It is easy to do nothing. And to do nothing is also an act; an act of indifference or cowardice.

A person must prepare himself intellectually and professionally and then use his powers to their fullest extent. This view is well expressed in two extracts from I Ching, the Confucian Book of Changes:

The superior man learns and accumulates the results of his learning; puts questions, and discriminates among those results; dwells magnanimously and unambitiously in what he has attained to; and carries it into practice with benevolence.

The superior man nerves himself to ceaseless activity.



To find a purpose in life, one must be willing to act, to put excellence into one’s work, and to have concern for what is right ahead of personal safety. Life must be felt, not observed. But to do so means applying oneself daily to the task. Ralph Waldo Emerson said: “God offers to every mind its choice between truth and repose. Take which you please—you can never have both.”

No professional man has the right to prefer his personal peace to the happiness of mankind; his place and his duty are in the front line of struggling men, not in the unperturbed ranks of those who keep themselves aloof from life. If a profession is to have its proper place in the development of society, it must be increasingly dissatisfied with things as they are. If there is to be any exalting of one’s work, one must learn to reach out, not to struggle for that which is just beyond, but to grasp at results which seem almost infinite. As Robert Browning wrote: “Ah, but a man’s reach should exceed his grasp, or what’s a Heaven for.”

Man’s work begins with his job; his profession. Having a vocation is something of a miracle, like falling in love. I can understand why Luther said that a man is justified by his vocation, for it is a proof of God’s favor. But having a vocation means more than punching a time clock. It means guarding against banality, ineptitude, incompetence, and mediocrity. A man should strive to become a locus of excellence.

Most of the work in the world today is done by those who work too hard; they comprise a “nucleus of martyrs.” The greater part of the remaining workers’ energy goes into complaining. Employees today seldom become emotional about their organization or its output; they are interested in making money or getting ahead. And many organizations are killing their employees with kindness, undercutting their sense of responsibility with an everincreasing permissiveness. This is a fatal error. For where responsibility ends, performance ends also. Man has a large capacity for effort. It is so much greater than we think it is, that few ever reach this capacity.

We should value the faculty of knowing what we ought to do and having the will to do it. But understanding is easy. It is the doing that is difficult. The critical issue is not what we know, but what we do with what we know. The great end of life is not knowledge, but action. Theodore Roosevelt expressed this concept well in his “Man in the Arena” statement:

“It is not the critic who counts, not the one who points out how the strong man stumbled, or how the doer of deeds might have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred with sweat, and dust, and blood; who strives valiantly; who errs and comes short again and again; who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, and spends himself in a worthy cause; who, if he wins, knows the triumph of high achievement; and who, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who know neither victory or defeat.”

The man in the arena has found a purpose in life. He daily experiences Emerson’s declaration that nothing is achieved without enthusiasm. He knows that men seldom come within shouting distance of their hopes for themselves. Yet he does not quit in resignation as have those who have taken trouble with nothing except to be born. In his work he is buffeted from two sides, challenged by his own ideas, which revolt at the compromises of reality, and assaulted by reality, which fights the ideas. He spends himself in that struggle, and he wins by a constant renewal of effort in which he refuses to sink either into placid acceptance of the situation or into self-satisfaction.

I believe it is the duty of each of us to act as if the fate of the world depended on him. Admittedly, one man by himself cannot do the job. However, one man can make a difference. Each of us is obligated to bring his individual and independent capacities to bear upon a wide range of human concerns. It is with this conviction that we squarely confront our duty to posterity. We must live for the future, not for our comfort or success.

For anyone seeking meaning for his life, a figure from Greek mythology comes to mind. It is that of Atlas, who bears with endless perseverance the weight of the heavens on his back. Atlas, resolutely bearing his burden and accepting his responsibility, gives us the example we seek.

To seek and accept responsibility; to persevere; to be committed to excellence; to be creative and courageous; to be unrelenting in the pursuit of intellectual development; to maintain high standards of ethics and morality; and to bring these basic principles of existence to bear through active participation in life—these are some of my ideas on the goals that must be met to achieve meaning and purpose in life.





The USS Nautilus in New York harbor. (Photo courtesy of the US Navy.)





The launching of the USS Nautilus, January 21, 1954. (Photo courtesy of the US Navy.)





On the deck of the USS Nautilus. L to R: Representative W. Sterling Cole, Republican, New York; Rear Admiral H. G. Rickover, USN, Director Nuclear Power Division, Bureau of Ships, Navy Department; Rear Admiral Frank T. Watkins, USN, Commander Submarine Force Atlantic Fleet; and Rep. Melvin Price, Democrat, Illinois; date unknown. (Photo courtesy of the US Navy.)





Senator Henry R. Jackson of Washington and Admiral Rickover admire steel plate commemorating the keel-laying of USS Nimitz, June 22, 1968, at Newport News Shipyard. Senator Jackson was an influential member of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. (Photo courtesy of the US Navy.)





Cape Canaveral, Florida, May 27, 1977. Admiral Rickover speaks to the group gathered at the nuclear-powered submarine USS Los Angeles (SSN-688). His answer to a question brings a laugh from President Jimmy Carter and the gathered crowd. President Carter was a lieutenant in the Naval Reactors program in the early 1950s and considered Rickover an influential mentor. (Photo courtesy of the US Navy.)





Admiral Rickover with his wife Eleonore at a dinner celebrating the launching of the USS Hyman G. Rickover on August 27, 1983, in Groton, Connecticut.

Admiral Rickover’s first wife Ruth passed away in 1972; they had one son, Robert. He and Eleonore were married in 1974. (Photo courtesy of Eleonore Rickover.)





BOOKS BY ADMIRAL H. G. RICKOVER





Education and Freedom (Dutton, 1959)

Swiss Schools and Ours: Why Theirs Are Better (Little, Brown, 1962)

American Education, a National Failure: The Problem of Our Schools and What We Can Learn from England (Dutton, 1963)

Eminent Americans: Namesakes of the Polaris Submarine Fleet (U.S. Congress, 1972)

How the Battleship Maine Was Destroyed (Naval Institute Press, 1976)





SOURCE MATERIALS





One: Engineering Opportunities

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Two: A Talented Mind

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Three: USS Benjamin Franklin

Eminent Americans: Namesakes of the Polaris Submarine Fleet (U.S. Congress, 1972).





Four: USS Thomas A. Edison

Eminent Americans: Namesakes of the Polaris Submarine Fleet (U.S. Congress, 1972).





Five: USS George Washington Carver

Eminent Americans: Namesakes of the Polaris Submarine Fleet (U.S. Congress, 1972).





Six: The Meaning of a Profession: Engineering

Education and Freedom (Dutton, 1959).





Seven: The Never-Ending Challenge

Metals Engineering Quarterly, February 1963, Vol. 3, No. 1.





Eight: The Decision to Use Zirconium in Nuclear Reactors

Zirconium Production and Technology: The Kroll Medal Papers, 1975–2010, edited by Ronald B. Adamson (ASTM International, 2010).





Nine: The Role of Engineering in the Navy

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Ten: Administering a Large Military Development Project

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Eleven: Congressional Testimony on Reactor Safety

Radiation Safety and Regulation: Hearings before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, Eighty-Seventh Congress, First Session on Radiation Safety and Regulation, June 12–15, 1961.





Twelve: Basic Principles of Naval Reactors Program

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Thirteen: Doing a Job

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Fourteen: Energy Resources and Our Future

Education and Freedom, Dutton (1959).





Fifteen: A Humanistic Technology

The American Behavioral Scientist, 1965, Vol. 9, No. 3.





Sixteen: Liberty, Science and Law

Liberty, Science and Law (Newcomen Society in North America, 1969).





Seventeen: Environmental Perspective

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





Eighteen: Thoughts on Man’s Purpose in Life

Economics of Defense Policy: Adm. H. G. Rickover, Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, Ninety-Seventh Congress, Part 2, Selected Congressional Testimony and Speeches by Adm. H. G. Rickover, 1953–1981.





REFERENCES





Preface

1. “The only radiological deaths caused by nuclear power in the United States occurred on January 3, 1961, at the experimental SL-1 reactor in a remote Idaho desert. Rickover had no responsibilities for or control of the project.” | Return to text





Introduction: Admiral Rickover—Innovative Engineer

1. F. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence (Annapolis, MD: The Naval Institute Press, 2001), 4–6. | Return to text

2. Ibid., 7; | Return to text

3. Ibid., 7–8; | Return to text

4. Ibid., 9–10; T. Rockwell, The Rickover Effect (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1992), 21. | Return to text

5. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 11–17. | Return to text

6. H. G. Rickover, Education and Freedom (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1959), 24. | Return to text

7. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, Chap. 2. | Return to text

8. Ibid., 20. | Return to text

9. Ibid., 78. | Return to text

10. Ibid., 77–78. | Return to text

11. B. Sloan, The Ultimate Battle: Okinawa 1945—The Last Epic Struggle of World War II (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007), 6. | Return to text

12. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 96–105; Rockwell, The Rickover Effect, 32–49; R. Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), 294. | Return to text

13. Rockwell, The Rickover Effect, 41. | Return to text

14. Ibid., 85. | Return to text

15. Ibid., 163–168; Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 105–115. | Return to text

16. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 78; Rockwell, The Rickover Effect, 201–261. | Return to text

17. Rockwell, The Rickover Effect, 235. | Return to text

18. H. G. Rickover, Engineering Opportunities. | Return to text

19. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 100. | Return to text

20. The PWR now makes up ~75% of the commercial light water nuclear reactors throughout the world. The other ~25% are boiling water reactors (BWRs), which allow water in the reactor to boil— eliminating the need for a steam generator. | Return to text

21. R. Hewlett and F. Duncan, The Nuclear Navy 1946–1964 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974), 284–285. | Return to text

22. Rockwell, The Rickover Effect, 184; T. Rockwell, personal communication. | Return to text

23. H. G. Rickover, L. D. Geiger, and B. Lustman, “History of the Development of Zirconium Alloys for the Nuclear Industry,” U.S. Report TID-26740 (1975). | Return to text

24. Hewlett and Duncan, The Nuclear Navy 1946–1964, Appendix 2. | Return to text

25. F. Duncan, Rickover: The Struggle for Excellence, 123–128. | Return to text

26. F. Duncan, Rickover and the Nuclear Navy: The Discipline of Technology (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1990). | Return to text





One: Engineering Opportunities

1. Copyright 1953, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Two: A Talented Mind

1. Copyright 1963, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text

2. Man on Earth (Sausalito, CA: Contact Editions, 1962), p. 30. | Return to text

3. Ibid. | Return to text





Three: USS Benjamin Franklin

1. Copyright 1972, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Four: USS Thomas A. Edison

1. Copyright 1972, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Five: USS George Washington Carver

1. Copyright 1972, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text

2. “A chemurgist is essentially a chemical engineer: a person who uses chemistry to produce something useful.” –Paul E. Cantonwine | Return to text





Six: The Meaning of a Profession: Engineering

1. “Copyright 1959, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover.” | Return to text





Seven: The Never-Ending Challenge

1. Originally published in Metals Engineering Quarterly, February 1963, Vol. 3, No. 1. Reprinted with permission of ASM International. All rights reserved. www.asminternational.org. | Return to text





Eight: The Decision to Use Zirconium in Nuclear Reactors

1. Copyright 1975, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text

2. “Equivalent to $3,800 per pound in 2011.” –Paul E. Cantonwine | Return to text

3. “Equivalent to approximately $45 per pound in 2011.” –Paul E. Cantonwine | Return to text





Nine: The Role of Engineering in the Navy

1. Copyright 1974, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Ten: Administering a Large Military Development Project

1. Reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Eleven: Congressional Testimony on Reactor Safety

1. Testimony provided before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy during a session on Radiation Safety and Regulation, June 14, 1961. | Return to text





Twelve: Basic Principles of Naval Reactors Program

1. Testimony provided before the Subcommittee on Energy Research and Production of the Committee on Science and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives, May 24, 1979. | Return to text





Thirteen: Doing a Job

1. Copyright 1981, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Fourteen: Energy Resources and Our Future

1. Copyright 1959, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text

2. “Usage of the term “coolie” has fallen out of favor because it can be considered offensive. It means unskilled laborer.” — Paul E. Cantonwine | Return to text

3. Compare following densities per square kilometer: China, 64; India, 56; Europe as a whole, 84; England, 297; and the Netherlands, 336. | Return to text

4. China grows at the rate of 2 per cent per year; India, 1.7 per cent, United States, 1.7 percent; world as a whole, 1.7 per cent. | Return to text

5. Based on the most careful and conservative estimates of demographers I could find two years ago. Recent U.N. statistics indicate that these estimates may have been too conservative and we may well reach the 4-billion mark for the world as a whole in but twenty years, or about 1980. Incidentally, at our present growth rates, the United States alone will reach a 4-billion population about 2150, thus telescoping the growth rate of the world as a whole in the short space of five hundred years—from 1650 to 2150! | Return to text





Fifteen: A Humanistic Technology

1. Copyright 1964, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Sixteen: Liberty, Science and Law

1. Copyright 1969, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





Seventeen: Environmental Perspective

1. Copyright 1979, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text

2. This risk estimate was made in 1977 by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation and by the International Commission on Radiological Protection. It is within the range of estimates in the 1979 draft report of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Committee on Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiations, and in the 1972 report of this committee. | Return to text

3. The National Academy of Science 1979 Report of the Advisory Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation is in contention over the views of a majority of the committee members on how much smaller the true effects will be. | Return to text





Eighteen: Thoughts on Man’s Purpose in Life

1. Copyright 1978, H. G. Rickover; reprinted with permission of Eleonore Rickover. | Return to text





